Journal of Fluids Engineering

Coarse-Grid Computational Fluid Dynamic (CG-CFD)
Error Prediction using Machine Learning
Botros N Hanna
Department of Nuclear Engineering,
North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA 27695-7909
e-mail: bnhannab@ncsu.edu
Nam T. Dinh
Professor
Department of Nuclear Engineering,
North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA 27695-7909
e-mail: ntdinh@ncsu.edu
ASME Member
Robert W. Youngblood
Adjunct Professor
Idaho National Laboratory
INL, P.O. Box 1625,
Idaho Falls, ID 83415-3870, USA
e-mail: robert.youngblood@inl.gov
Igor A. Bolotnov
Associate Professor
Department of Nuclear Engineering,
North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, NC, USA 27695-7909
e-mail: iabolotn@ncsu.edu

ABSTRACT
Despite the progress in high performance computing, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations are
still computationally expensive for many practical engineering applications such as simulating large
computational domains and highly turbulent flows. One of the major reasons of the high expense of CFD is

1

Journal of Fluids Engineering

the need for a fine grid to resolve phenomena at the relevant scale, and obtain a grid-independent
solution. The fine grid requirements often drive the computational time step size down, which makes long
transient problems prohibitively expensive. In the research presented, the feasibility of a Coarse Grid CFD
(CG-CFD) approach is investigated by utilizing Machine Learning (ML) algorithms. Relying on coarse grids
increases the discretization error. Hence, a method is suggested to produce a surrogate model that
predicts the CG-CFD local errors to correct the variables of interest. Given high-fidelity data, a surrogate
model is trained to predict the CG-CFD local errors as a function of the coarse grid local features. ML
regression algorithms are utilized to construct a surrogate model that relates the local error and the
coarse grid features. This method is applied to a three-dimensional flow in a lid driven cubic cavity domain.
The performance of the method was assessed by training the surrogate model on the flow full field spatial
data and tested on new data (from flows of different Reynolds number and/or computed by different grid
sizes). The proposed method maximizes the benefit of the available data and shows potential for a good
predictive capability.

Keywords: coarse grid (mesh), CFD, machine learning, discretization error, big data, artificial neural
network, random forest regression, data-driven.

1.

INTRODUCTION

1.1.

Motivation: The Need for CG-CFD

In performing high-fidelity simulations of complex fluid flows, Computational Fluid
Dynamics (CFD) approach has an advantage over traditional physical modeling, because
of its capability to provide detailed information about flow field. However, CFD is too
computationally expensive for many real-world applications such as oceanic flows,
nuclear energy applications, and indoor environment research (discussed below).

2

Journal of Fluids Engineering

a)

Oceanic Flows

An example of this computational challenge is simulating the turbulent ocean currents
in the North Atlantic that contain circulations with length scales ranging from few
meters to thousands of kilometers [1]. Capturing the full range of the circulations’
length scales using Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) [2] requires very high-resolution
grids and thus large computational power. On the other side, when modeling the
average effect of turbulence on ocean currents, turbulence models for ocean
simulations remove fluctuations of scales smaller than about 30 kilometers [1]. Hence,
the energy in these "small"–scale fluctuations are lost, so the turbulence models are
inaccurate.

b)

Nuclear Energy Applications

CFD’s computational expense problem also arises in nuclear engineering applications.
For instance, CFD simulation of a full reactor core, with its fuel rods, spacer grids, and
other components, is not yet practical [3]. Utilizing CFD in nuclear reactor accident
analyses is also computationally overwhelming, mainly due to long-time transient
problems. For example, CFD was used to analyze only one localized phenomenon that
may occur during nuclear accidents: high-pressure blowdown flow from the reactor
cooling system needed over a week of computing time on a 128-processor cluster to
simulate ten seconds of steam blowdown on a relatively coarse computational grid [4].
It would be computationally prohibitive to simulate complex, long transient and
accident scenarios in this way.
3

Journal of Fluids Engineering

c)

Indoor Environments

In turbulence modeling of indoor environments, research has been done aiming to
perform real-time simulation for cases like emergency evacuation of buildings [5]. Real
time simulation is not possible with the grid independent CFD. Hence, research was
performed to speed up CFD simulations by using coarse grids [5-7].

1.2.

The Need for Data-Driven Models

In CFD, high-fidelity results can be obtained by simulating all the turbulence length and
time scales using DNS [2], which is accurate but computationally challenging for many
applications (turbulent flows with high Reynolds number). A computationally cheaper
alternative approach is Large Eddy Simulation (LES) [8], that requires a computational
grid that is coarser than the grid needed in DNS. In LES, the large-scale motions (energycontaining eddies) are captured, while the small-scale flow motions are either modelled
using an explicit sub-grid scale model, or implicitly modeled using the numerical
dissipation associated with the computational scheme knows as Implicit LES (ILES) (see
[9, 10]).

Despite the progress in LES methods, the Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS)
equations [11] approach is still more popular and computationally economical in
industrial applications. RANS approach requires a coarse grid (compared to LES and
DNS) as it resolves the mean flow variables only, not the detailed instantaneous flow.
However, RANS models (such as 𝑘 − 𝜀 [12] and Spalart-Allmaras [13] model) lack
adaptability, i.e. RANS models perform well only for specific flow conditions and
4

Journal of Fluids Engineering

geometries. This gives an advantage to data-driven surrogate statistical models as they
could adapt via data assimilation as more data becomes available. The availability of
high-fidelity simulations provides an opportunity to inform data-driven coarse grid
models. Currently, as discussed below, several groups of researchers are pursuing the
development of data-driven methods to perform coarse grid simulations (see Section
1.3).

1.3.

Progress in Data-Driven Models in Fluid Dynamics

Traditionally, fluid flow models (for turbulence or multiphase flow, etc.) were developed
based on physical understanding of the phenomena often with certain empirical
assumptions. Recently, data-driven models have been developed based on data
processing and analysis (data-driven), in order to make more use of the available data.
An overview of recent data-driven models is presented below. These data-driven
models are either utilized in the context of CFD (to correct LES or RANS simulations or
compute closure terms for averaged variables’ equations) or in the context of Smoother
Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) [14].

a)

Autonomic sub-grid Large Eddy Simulation (ALES)

Autonomic Sub-grid Large Eddy Simulation (ALES) [15] can be regarded as a data-driven
method that utilizes a grid that is deemed to be coarse compared to DNS grid
requirements, but must be relatively fine to resolve Turbulence Kinetic Energy (TKE) in
the inertial range of the turbulence energy spectrum. The ALES method expresses the
local sub-grid scale stress tensor as a non-linear function of the resolved variables at all
5

Journal of Fluids Engineering

locations and all times with a Volterra series (which is similar to a Taylor series). The
series coefficients are computed by minimizing the error in sub-grid scale stresses at a
test filter scale. Then, coefficients are mapped to the LES scale assuming scale similarity
(noting that both LES scale and test scale lie in the self-similar inertial range of the
turbulence energy spectrum). The ALES method is a general model-free self-optimizing
approach for closure of turbulence simulations. The ALES method needs neither
previous training based on DNS results nor user specified parameters. Preliminary
results with simple problems (homogenous turbulence and sheared turbulence) showed
high accuracy in computing turbulent stresses compared to current turbulence models
[16]. However, the scale similarity assumption, upon which ALES is based, is valid only in
the inertial range (in turbulent kinetic energy spectrum). Therefore, applying ALES
approach is still impractical in simulating large domains / long transients.

b)

Closure Term in a Bubbly Flow Equation

Another example [17] from the multiphase flow field is finding the closure term in an
averaged simple equation for bubbly flow using an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) [18],
given accurate results obtained by DNS. In that problem, the initial vertical velocity and
the average bubble density are uniform except in one of the horizontal directions. As
the transient develops, the bubble density and velocity become uniform. It was
assumed that the unknown closure term depends on the void fraction, the void fraction
gradient, and the liquid velocity gradient. The ANN ”learns” the correlation between the
closure term and these three variables from one simulation dataset. A transient of
6

Journal of Fluids Engineering

different initial conditions can then be predicted using that correlation. That case study
was quite simple (the averaged equation is one-dimensional and the boundary
conditions are periodic).

c)

RANS Model Discrepancy

To reduce the RANS model discrepancy by learning from data, research groups from
University of Michigan and Virginia Tech University utilized ML techniques to predict or
reduce the error in RANS simulation results [19, 20]. Both groups made use of highfidelity simulation results from DNS to correct the low-fidelity model results from RANS.
In [19], RANS results are corrected by spatially distributed multiplicative discrepancy
term, 𝛽, into one of the terms of the transport equation of turbulent quantities; in [20],
the Reynolds stress discrepancy is directly based on mean flow features computed by
RANS. The statistical model in both cases is trained based on the available high-fidelity
data and then tested on other cases, which have a different Reynolds number or a
different flow geometry. Recently, the Virginia Tech University research group
suggested [21] that the group of input features could be reduced to 4 flow features. It
was also shown that not only could Reynolds stress discrepancy computed by RANS be
improved by predicting Reynolds stress discrepancy, but also the improved Reynolds
stress results in a more accurate velocity field.

Statistical data-driven models are usually trained on a set of data and then tested with
another group of data that are “close” to the training data in some sense. The
7

Journal of Fluids Engineering

“closeness” between training data and testing data can be used to assess the prediction
confidence a priori [22, 23]. This closeness could be quantified by metrics like the
Mahalanobis Distance [24] or the Kernel Density Estimation technique [25]. This
approach was successful in most cases except when the training and testing cases are
too close or too far apart [23].

ML model predictions, for RANS Reynolds stress anisotropy, for flows of similar physics,
should be similar. ML model predictions should not change with changing the
orientation of coordinate frame. In other words, ML predictions should be Galilean
invariant. Based on this principle, a multi-layer ANN (also called “deep learning”), with
invariant tensor basis, was proposed [26]. This way, Reynolds stress anisotropy tensor
can be predicted with embedded Galilean invariance. The proposed tensor-basis ANN
proved to have more accurate prediction compared to both RANS models and
conventional ANN.

d)

Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics

Data-driven models, for fluid simulations, are used not only in CFD, but also in
Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics (SPH) (where Navier Stokes (NS) equations are
approximated on fluid particles instead of a computational grid) [14].Random Forest
Regression (RFR) [27] was trained to predict the velocity and position of the fluid
particle in the next time step based on the velocity and the position in the previous time

8

Journal of Fluids Engineering

step [28]. This approach aims to “learn” the behavior of fluid from the training examples
and provides an alternative for real time fluid simulations.
1.4.

Scope of The Present Work

Since the traditional high-resolution (mesh-independent) CFD solution is
computationally expensive and using of coarse grid would result in high grid-induced
errors, the present work focuses on predicting the errors of the coarse grid solution.
While the previous research aimed largely to reduce the model form error, in this work,
the sub-grid effect is compensated for by a surrogate statistical model that is trained by
using high- fidelity simulation results (fine-grid CFD).

The objective of this work is to investigate the feasibility of obtaining a correction for
CG-CFD simulation results using ML algorithms. Numerical experiments are designed
and performed to study the feasibility of utilizing ML tools to get a correlation between
the ‘correct’ solution informed by fine grid simulation results and the coarse grid
variables.

Among the different sources of error in CFD simulation, the turbulence modeling error
and the discretization error are the most challenging ones. Below, in Subsections (a) and
(b), the present work is compared to other CFD approaches in terms of mitigating
turbulence modeling error and discretization error.

a)

Present Approach vs. Traditional CFD
9

Journal of Fluids Engineering

RANS turbulence models are popular because of the reduced computational expense
while representing three-dimensional flow behavior. RANS turbulence models typically
rely on incorporating more physics and using empirical models for some parameters
based on the available validation data. It is always required to get grid-independent
solution (with a grid convergence study), but this grid convergence study should be
applied within the range of grids that satisfy the turbulence model grid requirements.
Typically, for each new case, a new simulation is needed, even if the new case is only
slightly different from old cases

In the present work, the “No model” approach (where NS equations are solved
numerically without any turbulence model) is utilized with coarse grids (discretization
grids that are expected to produce non-accurate results). However, instead of
investigating the turbulence modeling error, we use the same “No model” approach
with different grids (fine and coarse grids) to train a surrogate model to compute this
grid-induced error. CG-CFD error is predicted by comparing high-fidelity results (with
fine grids) against CG-CFD results. With this surrogate model, the grid-induced error can
be predicted for other cases that have different grid sizes, Reynolds numbers, etc. The
surrogate model is adaptive with the available data so each new set of experimental
data or high-fidelity computations will be reflected in the automatically-improved
model, without the need for developing other models that capture the new data.

b)

Present Approach vs. Physics Informed Machine Learning
10

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Recently, research has been pursued in the direction of taking advantage of the ML
algorithms to develop surrogate models that can compute the turbulence modeling
error (for instance, [19, 20, 26]). This approach is known as Physics Informed Machine
Learning (PIML) approach. Both the present work and PIML method benefit from ML
algorithms to produce data-driven statistical models. However, PIML assumes that one
of the RANS models is used and the grid size criterion for this model is satisfied. Through
PIML, the difference between RANS flow variables profile and DNS profile is computed.
On the other side, the present work depends on the same Navier-Stokes equations used
with both fine and coarse grids. After that, the error resulting from the grid coarseness
is computed with the ML surrogate model.

1.5.

The Structure of This Paper

In this paper, a method is proposed to predict the CG-CFD induced error given coarse
grid features using ML surrogate models. This method is presented in Section 2. For
purposes of comparison, two ML algorithms (ANN [18] and Random Forest Regression
(RFR) [27] in MATLAB [29]) are each used to construct a surrogate model; these
surrogate models are presented in Section 3. This method was applied to a threedimensional quasi steady state turbulent flow inside a lid-driven cavity. The capability of
the statistical model to predict the coarse grid-induced error in different cases (different
Reynolds number and grid sizes) is illustrated and assessed in Section 4. The conclusions
of this paper are provided in Section 5.

2.

METHOD
11

Journal of Fluids Engineering

The problem statement is presented in Section 2.1 and depicted in Fig. 1. CG-CFD error
can be predicted under some hypothesis (see Section 2.2). The proposed method for
computing CG-CFD grid-induced error is explained in Section 2.3 and depicted in Fig. 2.
CG-CFD approach is applied and tested with a three-dimensional flow in a lid-driven
cubic cavity (see Section 2.4 and Fig. 3).

2.1.

Problem Statement

The general problem to be addressed in this work can be formulated as illustrated in Fig.
1. In Fig. 1, the vertical axis 𝜓 is a number or a set of numbers that characterize the flow
pattern (such as Reynolds number, Rayleigh number, domain aspect ratio, etc.), while
the horizontal axis is the computational grid spacing, 𝛥. For a specific problem of
interest (in this work it is the flow inside a lid-driven cubic cavity), the green-colored
area on the figure represents the high-fidelity data computed by sufficiently fine grids (∆
approaching zero). The subscript 𝑓 refers to a fine grid and 𝜑𝑓 is the flow variable of
interest (e.g. velocity component or pressure) computed by sufficiently fine grid. The
red-colored area refers to low-fidelity computations, of 𝜑, performed by coarse grids,
that may or may not have corresponding available high-fidelity computations, 𝜑𝑓 . The
problem here is how to use the low-fidelity and corresponding high-fidelity data to
construct a function that can predict the correct value of a new (not available) 𝜑, given
only the corresponding low-fidelity computation only.
Traditionally, a new high-fidelity computationally expensive simulation is performed for
each new 𝜓. In this work, the benefit of the data is maximized using the available high12

Journal of Fluids Engineering

fidelity data to capture the relation between coarse and fine grid data to predict 𝜑 for a
new case.

2.2.

Research Hypothesis

The present hypothesis is that the CG-CFD error is predictable, using data-driven
surrogate model, under the following assumptions:
▪

The training flows (to train the surrogate model) and the testing flows (to test

the trained surrogate model) have similar physics with similar complexity. In order to
correct the grid-induced error over the whole domain (for the training flows), highfidelity data over the whole domain are needed.
▪

When comparing the fine and coarse grid data, the number of the cells in both

grids is not the same. Thus, to compute local grid error, it is necessary to perform
mapping of the fine grid data onto the coarse grid. In other words, 𝜑𝑓 , is replaced by
𝜑𝑓→𝛥 (the fine grid field of 𝜑 mapped on a grid whose cell length is 𝛥). This mapping
(averaging) constitutes a source of error because of losing some details of the flow field
profile. However, this mapped field is much more accurate than the field computed by a
coarse grid (for instance, see Fig. 4).
▪

Using a coarse grid in the CG-CFD framework is limited by the scale of the

phenomena of interest. If the phenomena of interest have a length scale, 𝑙, the coarse
grids used should have a grid spacing, ∆ < 𝑙. It is assumed that the phenomena of
interest have a scale that is large enough that a data-driven surrogate model can be
used to predict the grid-induced error occurred due to the inability of the coarse grid to
resolve sub-grid length-scales.
13

Journal of Fluids Engineering

▪

Sub-grid flow features, computed by a coarse grid, are expected to be

inaccurate. However, it is hypothesized that the grid-induced error is a function of the
inaccurate coarse grid features.
▪

For most of the similar efforts in the literature (e.g. [19, 20, 23]) the aim was to

get a data-driven surrogate model that compensates for sub-grid effects; the ultimate
goal was predicting a quantity of interest (such as the lift force or Nusselt number) or
specific linear profile (such as the axial velocity profiles). On the other hand, in the
present work, it was assumed that we are interested in all the data through the whole
domain (flow variable value at each grid cell). Thus, the proposed approach makes more
use of the full field data.

2.3.

Proposed Approach

This section presents the proposed method for CG-CFD error prediction using ML
algorithms. In the following paragraphs, we will discuss the error prediction method,
feature selection, and ML error evaluation.

a)

CG-CFD Error Prediction Method

The proposed method illustrated in Fig. 2 consists of 2 sets of flows: training flows and
testing flows. Training flows are utilized to construct a surrogate model of the gridinduced error as a function of the coarse grid flow features. High-fidelity simulations of
the training flows are performed with sufficiently fine grids and represented by 𝜑𝑓𝑡𝑟 (𝑡𝑟
refers to training flows). Next, the same simulation is performed again with a coarse grid
𝑡𝑟
producing 𝜑𝛥𝑡𝑟 . 𝜑𝑓𝑡𝑟 is mapped onto the coarse grid, 𝛥, to obtain 𝜑𝑓→𝛥
. Based on the

14

Journal of Fluids Engineering

coarse grid simulations of the training flows, flow “features”, 𝑿(𝜑𝛥𝑡𝑟 ), are computed.
These features are the inputs to a surrogate model whose output is the local grid
induced error, 𝜀𝛥 (𝜑 𝑡𝑟 ):
𝑡𝑟
𝜀𝛥 (𝜑𝑡𝑟 ) = 𝜑𝑓→𝛥
− 𝜑𝛥𝑡𝑟 = 𝐹(𝑿(𝜑𝛥 ))

(1)

Selection of the features is discussed in the next section. The function 𝐹 is obtained
from ML algorithms (ANN and RFR). The capability of the surrogate model, obtained
from equation (1), is assessed by applying the model on testing flows as illustrated in
Fig. 2.

b)

Features Selection

Assuming a smooth profile for the flow variable, 𝜑, consider a Taylor series expansion
for a flow field variable 𝜑 along the 𝑥-direction in a grid with cell length of 𝛥𝑥:
𝜑 = 𝜑0 + 𝛥𝑥

𝑑𝜑
(𝛥𝑥)2 𝑑 2 𝜑
| +
| +⋯
𝑑𝑥 𝛥𝑥
2 𝑑𝑥 2 𝛥𝑥

(2)
𝑑2 𝜑

For a linear state variable profile, the grid-induced error will be of order (𝛥𝑥)2 𝑑𝑥 2 |

𝛥𝑥

𝑑2 𝜑

and the effect of 𝛥𝑥 𝑑𝑥 2 | may be considered for non-linear profiles. The flow state
𝛥𝑥

variables’ derivatives were utilized before as indicators of the need for high local
refinement in the adaptive-grid-refinement literature [30-32]. This was inspired by the
general observation that a finer grid is needed near a discontinuity or steep curve of the
solution. Another idea to be considered is the fact that the value of the variable 𝜑 and
its corresponding error at any grid cell is dependent on the value of 𝜑 and the

15

Journal of Fluids Engineering

𝑑𝜑

𝑑2 𝜑

corresponding error at the neighboring cells. Hence, the derivatives 𝑑𝑥 and 𝑑𝑥 2 are
carrying the effect of the neighboring cells.

Additionally, the fluid flow is typically characterized by global numbers like Reynolds
number, Rayleigh number, etc. Thus, we propose to utilize a local number (as flow
feature) which substitutes for the global number. In this work, the quantity of interest is
the velocity. Therefore, we selected the cell Reynolds number as the local quantity of
interest. The cell Reynolds number substitutes for the global velocity and length scales
with local velocity and cell length, 𝛥. The cell Reynolds number, 𝑅𝑒𝛥 , defined in terms of
the local velocity magnitude, |𝑈| and the kinematic viscosity, 𝜈, is given by:
𝑅𝑒𝛥 = |𝑈|𝛥⁄𝜈

(3)

Based on the previous discussions, the proposed features vector, 𝑋(𝜑𝛥 ), becomes:

𝑿(𝜑𝛥 ) = (𝑅𝑒𝛥 , 𝛥𝑥𝑗

𝑑𝑢𝑖
𝑑 2 𝑢𝑖
| , (𝛥𝑥𝑗 )2
| )
𝑑𝑥𝑗 𝛥𝑥
𝑑𝑥𝑗 2 𝛥𝑥
𝑗

(4)

𝑗

𝑑𝑢

Note that the term 𝛥𝑥𝑗 𝑑𝑥 𝑖 represents 9 features because the velocity has 3 components
𝑗

(𝑈𝑥, 𝑈𝑦, 𝑈𝑧 ) and the derivative is performed with respect to 3 directions (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) (for
instance:

𝑑𝑈𝑥, 𝑑𝑈𝑥,
𝑑𝑥

,

𝑑𝑦

, 𝑒𝑡𝑐. Similarly, the term (𝛥𝑥𝑗 )2

𝑑2 𝑢𝑖
𝑑𝑥𝑗 2

represents 27 features

(accounting for all the second derivatives for the 3 velocity components).

When comparing different sets of CFD data, it is desired to use dimensionless data for
performing comparisons between different geometries; hence, the features are
16

Journal of Fluids Engineering

normalized using the length scale and the velocity scale (see Table 1). The normalized
features, 𝑋̃, and the normalized grid induced-error, 𝜀̃𝛥𝑡𝑟 , are incorporated into equation
(1) as:
̃ (𝜑𝛥 ))
𝜀̃𝛥 (𝜑 𝑡𝑟 ) = 𝐹(𝑿

(5)

In this work (a lid-driven cavity flow), the length scale, 𝐻, is the cavity height, and the
velocity scale is the cavity lid velocity, 𝑈𝑙𝑖𝑑 .

c)

Machine Learning Error Assessment

To assess the accuracy of the surrogate model produced by ML algorithm, a metric, 𝐸𝑀𝐿
is proposed. This metric (ML error) is calculated as:
𝐸𝑀𝐿 =

|𝜀̃𝛥𝑎𝑐𝑡 (𝜑) − 𝜀̃𝛥𝑀𝐿 (𝜑)|
𝜎𝜀̃𝛥𝑎𝑐𝑡 (𝜑)

(6)

where 𝜀̃𝛥𝑎𝑐𝑡 (𝜑) is the actual grid-induced error when computing the variable 𝜑 and
𝜀̃𝛥𝑀𝐿 (𝜑) is the estimated error. The difference between the actual and ML prediction of
the grid-induced error is normalized by the standard deviation of the actual grid-induced
error, 𝜎𝜀̃𝑎𝑐𝑡 (𝜑) . Typically, when computing the surrogate model error, the difference
𝛥

between the actual and estimated value is divided by the actual value to get a relative
error. However, here, we divide by the standard deviation of the actual value to avoid
having zeros in the denominator. Additionally, computing ML error in Eq. (6) gives the
ML error in terms of the standard deviation of the grid-induced error.

17

Journal of Fluids Engineering

2.4.

Case Study

The lid-driven cavity flow is one of the most studied problems in CFD [33, 34]. Although
the problem can be stated relatively simply, the flow in a cavity features interesting flow
physics with counter-rotating vortices appearing at the corners of the cavity [34], and it
serves as a benchmark problem for numerical methods [35-37].

The case studied here is a fluid contained in a cube whose height is one meter, with five
fixed walls and one lid, moving with velocity, 𝑈𝑙𝑖𝑑 = 1 m/s (see Fig. 3). The physics of
this problem is related to the global Reynolds number, 𝑅𝑒, which is defined in terms of
the velocity magnitude,|𝑈|, the fluid kinematic viscosity, 𝜈 , and the cavity characteristic
length (height), 𝐻.
𝑅𝑒 =

|𝑈|𝐻
𝜈

(7)

At a Reynolds number between 2000 and 3000, an instability appears in the vicinity of
the downstream corner [38]. As expected, the turbulence level near the wall increases
with the increasing Reynolds number. The flow becomes fully turbulent near the
downstream corner eddy at Reynolds number higher than 10,000 [38].

a)

Governing Equations

In this work, CFD simulations were performed with one of the available open source CFD
software packages, OpenFOAM [39]. All the simulations were performed with threedimensional NS incompressible flow of a viscous Newtonian fluid [2]:

18

Journal of Fluids Engineering

𝜕𝑢𝑖
=0
𝜕𝑥𝑖

(8)

𝜕𝑢𝑖 𝜕𝑢𝑖 𝑢𝑗
𝜕 2 𝑢𝑖
𝜕𝑝
+
=𝜈
−
𝜕𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑗
𝜕𝑥𝑗 𝜕𝑥𝑗 𝜕𝑥𝑖

(9)

where 𝑢𝑖 is the velocity component 𝑖, 𝑝 is the kinematic pressure and 𝜈 is the kinematic
viscosity. NS equations are discretized in space using finite volume method on meshes
composed of hexahedral cells. NS equations are integrated over the volume of the
computational cells [40]. The time dependent term is assumed constant over the
computational cell volume. The divergence theorem is applied to convection, pressure
gradient and diffusion terms:
(10)

∬ 𝑑𝐴(𝑢𝑖 𝑛𝑖 ) = 0
𝐴

𝑉

𝜕𝑢𝑖
𝜕𝑢𝑖
+ ∬ 𝑑𝐴𝑢𝑖 𝑢𝑗 𝑛𝑗 = ∬ 𝑑𝐴𝜈
𝑛 − ∬ 𝑑𝐴𝑝𝑛𝑖
𝜕𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑗 𝑗

(11)

Where 𝑉 is the computational cell volume, 𝑛 is the normal of the surface of the control
volume and 𝐴 is the surface area. The area integrals can be written as summations over
each face:
(12)

∑(𝑢𝑖 𝑛𝑖 𝐴)𝑛𝑏𝑟 = 0
𝑛𝑏𝑟

𝑉

𝜕𝑢𝑖
𝜕𝑢𝑖
+ ∑(𝑢𝑖 𝑢𝑗 𝑛𝑗 𝐴)𝑛𝑏𝑟 = ∑ (𝜈
𝑛 𝐴)
− ∑(𝑝𝑛𝑖 𝐴)𝑛𝑏𝑟
𝜕𝑡
𝜕𝑥𝑗 𝑗 𝑛𝑏𝑟
𝑛𝑏𝑟

𝑛𝑏𝑟

(13)

𝑛𝑏𝑟

The subscript 𝑛𝑏𝑟 refers to the value at any given face. The time derivative term is
approximated using a second order scheme (backward difference). For the spatial
derivatives, the central difference scheme (second order accurate) has been used [41].

19

Journal of Fluids Engineering

b)

Numerical procedures

High-fidelity Simulations were performed on a 120 × 120 × 120 grid, with special
refinement towards the wall. The length of the cells touching the wall is 0.0014 meters
so the total number of cells in the fine grid is 2 × 106 cells.
In OpenFOAM, a transient solver (named pisoFoam) for incompressible, turbulent flow,
using the PISO algorithm [42], was used. Using pisoFoam, unsteady simulation can be
performed, but the focus of the present work is the quasi steady-state threedimensional flow inside the cavity.

c)

Training and Testing Cases

When training a surrogate data-driven model, the predictive capability of the model is
impacted by the similarity or the difference between the training flows and the testing
flow. Thus, to assess the surrogate model, different scenarios of the available training
data and the targeted testing case are studied (see the list of scenarios in Table 2).

3.

MACHINE LEARNING

It is a new challenge to explore/ analyze/ model/ exploit the “big data” generated by
high-resolution numerical simulation and physical experiments. ML algorithms can be
used to find patterns in data and build new models that predict new outcomes based on
historical data. In general, ML algorithms are classified depending on the available
information and the user purpose in two types: supervised learning and unsupervised

20

Journal of Fluids Engineering

learning. Supervised learning demands having a set of input variables (also called
features) and their corresponding outputs. These inputs and outputs help to train a
model that could predict the output for a new input. Supervised learning includes
applications like regression and classification. On the other side, unsupervised learning
is more challenging because the observations (raw data) are just given without
identifying inputs or outputs. Its function is to extract the internal relationships in the
dataset. Examples of unsupervised learning are: grouping the data (clustering), or
recognizing anomalies in the dataset, or discovering the association between some
variables. In the present work, the ML algorithms selected are ANN and RFR. These
techniques are used in this work for regression, and their effectiveness is compared.
ANN and RFR are presented in Sections 3.1 and 3.2.

3.1

Artificial Neural Network (ANN)

Artificial Neural Network (ANN) is a well-known non-linear adaptive regression tool that
identifies a function that relates the given inputs and outputs. ANN structure was
originally intended to mimic that of human brain. ANN consists of computational units
that are named artificial neurons. The biological neuron receives signals and activates if
the signal is strong (exceeds a threshold), and then sends the signal to another neuron,
and so on. The artificial neuron executes a similar process: it receives input variables
which are multiplied by weights (which modify the signal strength), and are then
processed by a mathematical activation function (like neuron activation) to produce the
output.
a)

ANN Structure
21

Journal of Fluids Engineering

ANN structure can be represented mathematically as follows:
⏟ = 𝑓( 𝒘
𝒂
⏟ 𝑿
⏟ + 𝒃
⏟)
𝑆×1

𝑆×𝑅 𝑅×1

⏟ = 𝜶
𝑌
⏟ 𝒂
⏟ + ⏟
𝜆
1×1

1×𝑆 𝑆×1

(14)

𝑆×1

(15)

1×1

where 𝑋 is the vector of features (inputs) and 𝑌 is the output. The number of inputs is 𝑅
and the number of neurons is 𝑆. 𝑓 is the activation function, which is most often chosen
to be a hyperbolic tangent function. For instance, in our case, 𝑋 is a vector of flow
features at any point on the coarse grid of the simulation domain and the output
variable 𝑌 is the local coarse grid-induced error. Given some number of samples, the
weights, 𝑤 and 𝛼, and the biases, 𝑏 and λ, are adjusted to optimize the performance of
the ANN by minimizing the Mean Squared Error (MSE). The MSE at each sample (data
point) is defined as follows:
𝑁

1
𝑀𝑆𝐸 = ∑(𝑇𝑘 − 𝑌𝑘 )2
𝑁

(16)

𝑘=1

where 𝑁 is the number of samples, and 𝑇𝑘 and 𝑌𝑘 are the target and its corresponding
output (prediction by ANN) respectively at each point 𝑘.

b)

ANN Training and Testing

To adjust the weight and biases - that is, to train the ANN - there are many different
algorithms. The algorithm that was used in this work is the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm [43, 44]. For a vector of weights and biases, 𝒁𝑘 (at iteration 𝑘), the algorithm
iteration to update 𝑿𝑘 is:

22

Journal of Fluids Engineering

𝒁𝑘+1 = 𝒁𝑘 − [𝑱𝑇𝑘 𝑱𝑘 + 𝜇𝑰]−1 𝑱𝑘 𝒆𝑘

(17)

where the vector of network error (difference between target and output) is 𝒆 whose
first derivatives with respect to weights and biases are contained in the Jacobian matrix,
𝐽. 𝐼 is the identity matrix, and 𝜇 is a positive number called the combination effect. 𝜇𝐼 is
added to avoid having a non-invertible matrix 𝐽𝑘𝑇 𝐽𝑘 . 𝜇 is called the combination effect
because if 𝜇𝐼 is large, this method is called gradient descent method, and if 𝜇𝐼 is small
(near zero), it becomes Newton’s method. To minimize the error, 𝜇 is initiated with a
large value and it gets decreased after each successful iteration. Successful iteration
means an iteration that is accompanied by a reduction in MSE.
To test ANN efficiency, the samples are divided into three separate groups: (1)- The
training data (most of the data, typically 70% of the whole dataset): these samples are
utilized by the network to adjust the weights and biases. (2)- The validation data
(typically 15% of the whole data): these samples are used to measure the network
generalization (if MSE gets reduced with iterations for training data but it increases for
the validation data group, that means the generalization deteriorates). Therefore, the
training process stops when generalization stops improving. 3- The testing data
(typically 15% of the data): these samples do not influence the training process and they
give an independent measure of the ANN predictive capability with a new dataset (one
that was not used in the training process).

3.2

Random Forest Regression

Random forest regression is composed of a group of regression trees. A regression tree
[45] predicts responses to input variables following the decisions in the tree from the
23

Journal of Fluids Engineering

root node down to a leaf node (see Fig. 5). Each leaf node contains a possible response,
𝑌. Each step in the prediction involves checking the value of one predictor (input). On
each predictor, all the possible binary splits are examined. The split that leads to the
best result is selected; the optimization criterion is typically minimizing MSE. The split
may result in a child node that has very few observations (data); this is why a minimum
leaf size (minimum observations per node) is specified a priori. For the new child nodes
(new leaves), the same procedure is taken to split the new nodes. This process
continues again and again. Therefore, the regression tree always has a stopping rule.
The stopping rule means that the splitting stops when the number of observations per
leaf is equal to the minimum one.
The process of splitting is illustrated in Fig. 5, which represents a simple tree with 𝑥1 , 𝑥2
and 𝑥3 as inputs (predictors) with 4 leaves (4 responses). Regression trees are
computationally cheap, but they over-fit the data; this is why many trees are used
together (tree bagging).
In tree bagging, a random sample of the training data is given to each regression tree so
each tree is trained based on a different dataset. Hence, for a new sample (unseen
data), each tree will make a different prediction. The prediction of the whole tree bag is
the average of all the individual trees’ predictions [27].
This method is called the random forest because a random subset of input variables
(features) are utilized at each split in each tree (in the tree bag). If the number of the
features is 𝑅, the number of features at each split is typically 𝑅/3 [46].

24

Journal of Fluids Engineering

The sampling technique used in random forest algorithm is the bootstrap sampling [47].
In this technique, the sample size (for each individual tree) is equal to the original
dataset size but the data are chosen with replacement which means that some data
points (rows) may be selected more than once and other rows are not chosen at all. In
this way, the data given to each tree is different so the trees’ predictions will be
different and the over-fitting is eliminated when combining trees’ results together. On
the other side, bootstrapping leads to a sample per tree which looks like the original
sample of the original dataset.
The optimum number of trees is determined based on the “Out Of Bag error” (OOB
error). OOB error is the average prediction error on a training data point if we used the
trees that did not have this data point when bootstrap sampling. It is always desired to
achieve minimum OOB error; therefore, the number of trees is chosen based on this
criterion. The typical number of trees in random forest algorithms is 100.

4.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

This section presents the results of applying the proposed grid-induced error prediction
method on the flow inside a lid-driven cubic cavity. We start by validating the high-fidelity
fine grid simulations that are utilized to compute the grid-induced error (see Section 4.1).
Next, the capability of the proposed CG-CFD approach, to predict the grid-induced error,
is assessed given a variation of training and testing data (see Section 4.2). A set of
numerical experiments are performed to predict the grid-induced error corresponding to
the different velocity components given the scenarios listed in Table 2. Finally, some
25

Journal of Fluids Engineering

issues, that need to be addressed to actualize the proposed CG-CFD approach, are
discussed in Section 4.3.

4.1.

Validation

In this work, simulations are performed for a lid-driven cavity flow with Reynolds
numbers ranging from 6,000 to 12,000. Because the grid size requirements increase
with increasing Reynolds number, we started by validating OpenFOAM simulation
results for a flow whose Reynolds number equals 12,000. Next, the grid, that was used
with 𝑅𝑒 = 12,000, is used for the lower Reynolds-number simulations. Fig. 6 compares
the velocity profile captured with experiment [48, 49] with OpenFOAM simulations. Fig.
6 depicts the velocity profiles computed with different grids: ∆= 0.0083m
(corresponding to 120×120×120 grid), ∆= 0.0167𝑚 (corresponding to 60×60×60 grid)
and ∆= 0.033𝑚 (corresponding to 30×30×30 grid). It is shown that the computed
profile agrees well with the experimental one when adding wall refinement cells. The
finest grid (∆= 0.0083m with wall refinement near the wall) is utilized to gain highfidelity data for different Reynolds numbers. Using coarse grids, without wall region
refinement, results in inaccurate results. In the next section, coarse uniform grids (∆=
0.05m, ∆= 0.033m, ∆= 0.025m) inaccurate results are corrected with the help of a ML
data-driven model.

4.2.

Training and Testing Cases

This section goes through the scenarios listed in Table 2 to capture the grid-induced
error for the testing flow if the surrogate model is trained with training flows’ data. The

26

Journal of Fluids Engineering

variable of interest, in the first 9 scenarios, was taken to be the spatial distribution of
𝑈𝑥 . For the first scenario, both ANN (with 20 neurons) and RFR (with 100 regression
tree) were used to predict 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ):
a)

Scenario I: Reynolds Number Interpolation

Starting with an ANN, Fig. 7 depicts the reduction in MSE with increasing the number of
training iterations (epochs). In each iteration, ANN network weights and biases are readjusted to reduce the MSE given the target (actual 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 )) and the output (ANN
predicted 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 )). It is shown that the MSE gets saturated at around 0.0001 after 78
epochs. Ideally, MSE = 0. In Fig. 7, a scatter plot, of the ANN-predicted 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ) vs. the
actual 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ), is presented. The training flows, given to ANN, are divided into three
groups (training, testing and validating data), as explained in Section 3.1. The dotted
diagonal line plot represents a perfect agreement between the targeted and the
predicted 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ) while the solid line is the best fit for the available data. The correlation
coefficient, 𝑅 is close to unity which indicates a very good agreement between ANN
prediction and target value for all the data groups (training, testing and validating data
groups).
While ANN predicts 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ), the variable of interest is 𝑈𝑥 (in particular: 𝑈𝑥 𝒇→𝜟 = 𝑈𝑥 𝜟 +
𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 )). A comparison between the actual 𝑈𝑥 𝒇→𝜟 and the ANN prediction of 𝑈𝑥 𝒇→𝜟 is
illustrated in Fig. 8. The vertical axis refers to the actual 𝑈𝑥 𝒇→𝜟 (𝑢𝑓 in Fig. 8). The
horizontal axis refers to one of three variables: (1) 𝑈𝑥 𝒇→𝜟 (𝑢𝑓 ), which corresponds to the
solid black line, referring to the perfect case when the ANN-predicted 𝑈𝑥 𝒇→𝜟 = 𝑈𝑥 𝜟 +
𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ) is exactly equal to the actual one: (2) 𝑈𝑥 𝜟 (𝑢𝑐 in Fig. 8) which corresponds to the
27

Journal of Fluids Engineering

crossed points referring to the coarse grid results compared to fine grid results; (3) ML
prediction (circled points), which computes 𝑈𝑥 𝒇→𝜟 given coarse grid results, 𝑈𝑥 𝜟 ,and
ANN prediction of 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ). It is shown in Fig. 8 that ML predictions for both training and
testing cases are close to the ideal case. Some circled points deviated from the “ideal”
solid line but most ML predictions (circled points) give visible improvements over the
coarse grid results (crossed points). Note that Fig. 8 shows a regression of “big data”.
For instance, training flows include data from 3 grids for training: each grid has 27,000
cells with 37 features computed at each cell.
For scenario I, RFR is also utilized for predicting 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ). To optimize the number of trees
in RFR, OOB error (explained in Section 3.2) is minimized. As illustrated in Fig. 9, the
OOB error gets saturated at a minimum value when using 100 regression trees.
As was shown for the ANN, Fig. 10 illustrates the comparison between RFR predictions
and coarse grid predictions. RFR training is better than ANN without a single point
deviating from the ideal solid line.

b)

Scenarios II and III: Reynolds Number Extrapolation.

In the second scenario, the testing flow case gets more challenging because the testing
case is outside the training flows’ range. Prediction of the grid-induced error using ANN
and RFR are presented in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12. ML capability of prediction in scenario II is
not as good as the scenario I. However, ML predictions are still better than coarse grid
results. RFR predictions do not deviate much away from the ideal line.

28

Journal of Fluids Engineering

In Table 3, a comparison between ANN and RFR efficiency, in different scenarios, is
presented. The comparison is presented in terms of ML error, 𝐸𝑀𝐿 , defined by Eq. (6),
and the computational cost. In both scenarios (I and II), RFR leads to smaller mean and
maximum 𝐸𝑀𝐿 compared to ANN. RFR is also computationally cheaper than ANN. Thus,
for the next scenarios, only RFR is utilized. In scenario III (extrapolation to a lower
Reynolds number, plotted in Fig. 13), RFR still results in good predictions.

c)

Scenarios IV, V and VI: Grid Size Interpolation and Extrapolation.

The focus of scenarios IV, V and VI is the grid size. RFR predictions for these scenarios
are illustrated in Fig. 14, Fig. 15, and Fig. 16. RFR performs very good data training for
the three scenarios. RFR regression for the testing case is not as good as the training
flows’ data. RFR predictions for the testing cases (interpolation or extrapolation to a
finer or a coarser grid) are still close to the ideal solid line. In Table 3, the mean 𝐸𝑀𝐿 is
around 0.4 for the three scenarios while the maximum 𝐸𝑀𝐿 increases when
extrapolation to a finer grid (𝐸𝑀𝐿 = 4) and decreases in extrapolation to a coarser grid
(𝐸𝑀𝐿 = 2).

d)
Scenarios VII, VIII and IX: Reynolds Number and Grid Size Interpolation and
Extrapolation.
Scenarios VII, VIII and IX are the most challenging ones because the testing flows differ
from the training flows in both Reynolds number and grid size. As illustrated in Fig. 17,
Fig. 18 and Fig. 19, most RFR predictions are very close the ideal solid line. According to
Table 3, for the scenarios VII, VIII and IX, the mean 𝐸𝑀𝐿 is 0.4 or lower, and the
29

Journal of Fluids Engineering

maximum 𝐸𝑀𝐿 is not high compared to the range of 𝐸𝑀𝐿 for previous scenarios which
are less demanding.

e)

Other Variables 𝑈𝑦 and 𝑈𝑧

All the previous numerical experiments were performed assuming that the variable of
interest is 𝑈𝑥 (which corresponds to the velocity direction of the cavity lid motion). In
this section, the variables 𝑈𝑦 and 𝑈𝑧 are considered with scenarios VII and VIII (in Table
2). Both scenarios VII and VIII were selected as they represent the more general
scenarios (with testing flows’ grid size and Reynolds number different from the training
flows). Note that the feature vector defined in Eq. (4) remains unchanged when the
output of interest (𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 )) is replaced by 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑦 ) and 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑧 ).

In Fig. 20 and Fig. 21, RFR predictions, for the velocity 𝑈𝑦 , are compared to the true
values. In both cases, RFR prediction gives an improvement over the coarse grid
predictions for most points. On the other hand, RFR performance is poor when
predicting 𝑈𝑧 in Fig. 22 and Fig. 23 . RFR predictions for 𝑈𝑧 give no improvement over
the coarse grid results.

The performance of RFR in predicting 𝑈𝑦 and 𝑈𝑧 is assessed in Table 3 in terms of 𝐸𝑀𝐿 .
For the velocity 𝑈𝑦 , 𝐸𝑀𝐿 is comparable to (a little bit higher than) 𝐸𝑀𝐿 when computing
𝑈𝑥 . On the other hand, for the velocity 𝑈𝑧 , ML errors for the testing data are very high
compared to 𝑈𝑥 and 𝑈𝑦 . For 𝑈𝑧 , the correlation between the fine grid velocity and the
30

Journal of Fluids Engineering

coarse grid velocity is very poor. 𝑈𝑧 is very small (and less significant) compared to the
other velocity components, so it is sensitive to any ML error.

f)

Data Convergence

In the proposed approach, the flow of interest (testing flow) simulation grid-induced
error is predicted given a surrogate model based on data from the available training
flows. It is necessary to explore how this surrogate model accuracy will be impacted by
adding or removing some data. The surrogate model should give better performance
with more training flows. This is called “data convergence”.

Four studies of data convergence are presented in Table 4 (assuming that 𝑈𝑥 is the
variable of interest): In the first study, all the training and testing flows have the same
grid size (∆= 1/30 ) while the Reynolds number changes. Adding more training data
with Reynolds number closer to the testing data leads to a lower 𝐸𝑀𝐿 . In the second
study, adding more training data with Reynolds number far from testing data, led to
lower mean 𝐸𝑀𝐿 and little change in the maximum 𝐸𝑀𝐿 . The studies III and IV focus on
adding data with different grid size while the Reynolds number is fixed. The studies III
and IV led to results similar to the first and the second studies.

4.3.

Open Issues

The case study results, presented in this paper, indicate potential of using machine
learning algorithms for prediction of the CG- CFD error. The study also points to a range

31

Journal of Fluids Engineering

of challenges and open issues that need to be addressed before the proposed method
could become practical:
▪

Surrogate model validation range: The validation range of the surrogate model,

developed by ML, is yet to be established. It is expected that the capability of the
surrogate model is related to the “closeness” between the training flows and the testing
flows. A metric for this closeness may serve as a priori assessment for the surrogate
model prediction confidence.
▪

Flow complexity: Compared to flows in real world applications, the studied case

(lid-driven cavity flow) is three-dimensional and turbulent while isothermal. Nonisothermal flow needs to be studied to assess the capability of the proposed method.
This would require additional features (e.g. temperature gradients) plus potentially
more sophisticated ML algorithms (e.g., deep learning [50]). Additionally, the flow
studied here is quasi steady state while the flows in many engineering applications may
be transient. However, in the proposed approach, a quasi-steady-state approach is
adopted (the flow variables are corrected locally, based on local flow features), for the
local time scale can be assumed to be much shorter than characteristic time scale of
transient in engineering systems of interest. More generally, time derivatives terms may
be involved as flow features to account for the transient behavior.
▪

Conservation and Galilean invariance requirements: In the case study, velocity

components computed by CG-CFD are corrected separately, without enforcing
conservation and Galilean invariance. Consequently, ML predictions are dependent on

32

Journal of Fluids Engineering

the orientation of coordinate frame. This limits the predictive capability especially if the
training flows and testing flows have different geometries.

5.

CONCLUSIONS

High-resolution results from simulations or experiments produce an enormous
amount of data (spatio-temporal distribution of field variables of interest; typical grid
sizes may exceed billions of data points over millions of time steps). These “big data” are
not optimally usable because, for each new scenario of interest, a sufficiently fine grid
CFD simulation needs to be performed. This traditional approach is computationally
overwhelming for simulation of thermal-fluid processes in many practical large-scale and
engineering applications.
In the present work, CG-CFD simulations are performed and the CG-CFD induced
error is learned by a surrogate model constructed by ML algorithms. The surrogate model
is trained given the available fine grid and coarse grid data. Both fine and coarse grid data
were performed with the same set of conservation equations (no turbulence modeling).
Hence, it was assumed that coarsening the grid leads to higher discretization error while
the model discrepancy is negligible. The coarse grid-induced local error distribution was
predicted, given features computed from the coarse grid simulations. The function that
relates the error to the features is constructed using ML techniques: ANN and RFR. The
proposed method was applied to analyze three-dimensional flow inside a lid driven cavity.
The proposed approach was found to be capable of correcting the coarse grid
results, obtaining reasonable predictions for new cases (having different Reynolds
33

Journal of Fluids Engineering

number and/or being computed using different grid sizes). The velocity components of
interest in the new cases, were corrected over the whole solution domain. The surrogate
model performance improved when adding data that are more relevant and it is generally
insensitive when less-relevant data are incorporated into the training.
While sufficiently accurate predictions were obtained in both algorithms using
ANN and RFR, the one using the RFR technique results in predictions that are more
accurate and with higher computational efficiency. The CG-CFD method performance is
promising, and has the potential to enable more computationally affordable simulations,
which benefit from the available and growing high-fidelity simulation and experimental
data. The method still needs further assessment in scenarios when the testing and the
training flow have different geometries or different physics.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported through the INL Laboratory Directed Research & Development
(LDRD) program under DOE Idaho Operations Office Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517.

ABBREVIATIONS
ALES

Autonomic Sub-grid Large Eddy Simulation

ANN

Artificial Neural Network

CFD

Computational Fluid Dynamics

CG

Coarse Grid

CG-CFD

Coarse-Grid Computational Fluid Dynamics

34

Journal of Fluids Engineering

DNS

Direct Numerical Simulation

HPC

High Performance Computing

LES

Large Eddy Simulation

MATLAB

Matrix Laboratory

ML

Machine Learning

MSE

Mean Squared Error

NS

Navier Stokes

OOB

Out Of Bag

PIML

Physics Informed Machine Learning

PISO

Pressure Implicit Splitting of Operators

RANS

Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes

RFR

Random Forest Regression

SGS

Sub-Grid Scale

TKE

Turbulence Kinetic Energy

NOMENCLATURE
𝐸𝑀𝐿

Machine learning error metric

𝐹

Surrogate function

𝐻

cavity characteristic length (height)

𝑅

Correlation coefficient

𝑅𝑒

Reynolds number.

35

Journal of Fluids Engineering

𝑅𝑒𝛥

Computational grid cell based Reynolds number

𝑈

Velocity vector.

𝑈𝑥 , 𝑈𝑦 , 𝑈𝑧

Velocity components in the Cartesian coordinates.

𝑉

Volume of computational cell.

X

Features (inputs) in machine learning algorithm

𝑋̃

The normalized features

𝑝

Kinematic pressure.

𝑡

Time

x, y, z

Cartesian coordinates.

Greek letters
∆

Grid spacing or cell length.

𝜓

A number or a set of numbers which characterize the flow pattern

𝛽

A spatially distributed multiplicative discrepancy term.

𝜀𝛥 (𝜑)

Grid-induced error when computing a variable 𝜑

𝜀̃𝛥

The normalized grid induced error

𝜈

Kinematic viscosity.

𝜎

Standard deviation

𝜑

Flow variable.

𝜑𝒇

Variable computed by fine grid.

𝜑𝑓𝑡𝑟

Variable computed by fine grid for the training flows

36

Journal of Fluids Engineering

𝜑𝛥

Variable computed by a grid, 𝛥.

𝜑𝛥𝑡𝑟

Variable computed by a grid, 𝛥 for the training flows

𝜑𝛥𝑡𝑒

Variable computed by a grid, 𝛥 for the testing flows

𝜑𝑓→𝛥

High-fidelity result mapped on a coarse-grid ∆

37

Journal of Fluids Engineering

REFERENCES
[1] Thorpe, S.A., 2007, An Introduction to Ocean Turbulence, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, Chap. 1. ISBN: 978-0-511-36626-0
[2] Pope, S.B., 2000, Turbulent Flows, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, Chap.
9. ISBN: 978-0-521-59886-6
[3] Viellieber, M. and A. Class, (2015). "Coarse‐Grid‐CFD for the Thermal Hydraulic
Investigation of Rod‐Bundles," PAMM, 15(1), 497-498.
[4] Hanna, B. N., 2014, "Evaluation of CFD Capability for Simulation of Energetic Flow in
Light Water Reactor Containment," MSc. Thesis,
https://repository.lib.ncsu.edu/handle/1840.16/10153
[5] Wang, H. and Z. Zhai, 2012. "Application of coarse-grid computational fluid dynamics
on indoor environment modeling: Optimizing the trade-off between grid resolution and
simulation accuracy," HVAC&R Research, 18(5), pp. 915-933.
[6] Wang, H., Z.J. Zhai and X. Liu, 2014. "Feasibility of utilizing numerical viscosity from
coarse grid CFD for fast turbulence modeling of indoor environments," Building
Simulation, 7(2), pp. 155-164.
[7] Andrews IV, A.T., P.N. Loezos and S. Sundaresan, 2005. "Coarse-grid simulation of
gas-particle flows in vertical risers," Ind Eng Chem Res, 44(16), pp. 6022-6037.
[8] Smagorinsky, J., 1963. "General circulation experiments with the primitive equations:
I. The basic experiment," Mon. Weather Rev., 91(3), pp. 99-164.
[9] Grinstein, F.F., L.G. Margolin, W.J. Rider, 2007, Implicit Large Eddy Simulation:
Computing Turbulent Fluid Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, Chap.
1. ISBN: 978-1-900-36496-6
[10] Zhou, Y. and B. Thornber, 2016, "A Comparison of Three Approaches to Compute
the Effective Reynolds Number of the Implicit Large-Eddy Simulations," ASME J.Fluids
Eng, 138(7), p. 070905.
[11] Reynolds, O., 1894, "On the dynamical theory of incompressible viscous fluids and
the determination of the criterion," Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, London,
56, pp. 40-45.
[12] Launder, B.E. and D.B. Spalding., 1974, "The numerical computation of turbulent
flows," Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., 3(2), pp. 269-289.

38

Journal of Fluids Engineering

[13] Spalart, P. and S. Allmaras, 1992, "A one-equation turbulence model for
aerodynamic flows," 30th aerospace sciences meeting and exhibit, Seattle, WA, 439, pp.
5-21
[14] Lucy, L.B., 1977, "A numerical approach to the testing of the fission hypothesis,"
The astronomical journal, 82(12), pp. 1013-1024.
[15] King, R., P.E. Hamlington and W. Dahm, 2015, "Autonomic subgrid-scale closure for
large eddy simulations," 53rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, p. 1285
[16] King, R.N., P.E. Hamlington and W.J. Dahm, 2016, "Autonomic closure for
turbulence simulations," Physical Review E, 93(3), 031301.
[17] Ma, M., J. Lu and G. Tryggvason, 2015, "Using statistical learning to close two-fluid
multiphase flow equations for a simple bubbly system," Physics of Fluids (1994-present),
27(9), 092101.
[18] Demuth, H. and M. Beale, 1993, “Neural Network Toolbox User’s Guide,”
https://www.mathworks.com/help/pdf_doc/nnet/nnet_ug.pdf
[19] Parish, E.J. and K. Duraisamy, 2016, "A paradigm for data-driven predictive
modeling using field inversion and machine learning," Journal of Computational Physics,
305, pp. 758-774.
[20] Wang, J., J. Wu and H. Xiao, 2017, " Wang, Jian-Xun, Jin-Long Wu, and Heng Xiao.
"Physics-informed machine learning approach for reconstructing Reynolds stress
modeling discrepancies based on DNS data," Physical Review Fluids, 2(3), p.034603.
[21] Wang, J., J. Wu, J. Ling, G. Iaccarino and H. Xiao, 2017, "A Comprehensive PhysicsInformed Machine Learning Framework for Predictive Turbulence Modeling" arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.07102.
[22] Ling, J. and J. Templeton, 2015, "Evaluation of machine learning algorithms for
prediction of regions of high Reynolds averaged Navier Stokes uncertainty," Physics of
Fluids (1994-present), 27(8), p.085103.
[23] Wu, J., J. Wang, H. Xiao and J. Ling, 2016, "Physics-informed machine learning for
predictive turbulence modeling: A priori assessment of prediction confidence," arXiv
preprint arXiv:1607.04563.
[24] De Maesschalck, R., D. Jouan-Rimbaud and D.L. Massart, 2000, "The mahalanobis
distance" Chemometrics Intellig. Lab. Syst., 50(1), pp.1-18.

39

Journal of Fluids Engineering

[25] Silverman, B.W., 1986, Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis, CRC
press, FL, USA, Chap. 1. ISBN: 978-0-412-24620-3
[26] Ling, J., A. Kurzawski and J. Templeton, 2016, "Reynolds averaged turbulence
modelling using deep neural networks with embedded invariance," J. Fluid Mech., 807,
pp. 155-166.
[27] Breiman, L., 2001, "Random forests," Mach. Learning, 45(1), pp. 5-32.
[28] Jeong, S., B. Solenthaler, M. Pollefeys and M. Gross, 2015, "Data-driven fluid
simulations using regression forests," ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 34(6), p.199.
[29] Guide, M.U., (1998). "The mathworks" Inc., Natick, MA, 5, 333.
[30] Baker, T.J., 1997, "Mesh adaptation strategies for problems in fluid dynamics,"
Finite Elements Anal. Des., 25(3-4), pp. 243-273.
[31] Venditti, D.A. and D.L. Darmofal, 2000, "Adjoint error estimation and grid
adaptation for functional outputs: Application to quasi-one-dimensional flow," Journal
of Computational Physics, 164(1), pp. 204-227.
[32] Nadal, E., A. Leygue, F. Chinesta, M. Beringhier, J. Ródenas and F. Fuenmayor, 2015,
"A separated representation of an error indicator for the mesh refinement process
under the proper generalized decomposition framework," Comput. Mech., 55(2), pp.
251-266.
[33] Ghia, U., K.N. Ghia and C. Shin, 1982, "High-Re solutions for incompressible flow
using the Navier-Stokes equations and a multigrid method," Journal of computational
physics, 48(3), pp. 387-411.
[34] Erturk, E., 2009, "Discussions on driven cavity flow," Int. J. Numer. Methods Fluids,
60(3), pp. 275-294.
[35] Botella, O. and R. Peyret, 1998, "Benchmark spectral results on the lid-driven cavity
flow," Comput. Fluids, 27(4), pp. 421-433.
[36] Tveit, J., (2014). "A Numerical Approach to Solving Nonlinear Differential Equations
on a Grid with Potential Applicability to Computational Fluid Dynamics" arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1072.
[37] Horton, B., Y. Song, J. Feaster and J. Bayandor, 2017, "Benchmarking of
Computational Fluid Methodologies in Resolving Shear-Driven Flow Fields," ASME J.
Fluids Eng., 139(11), p. 111402.

40

Journal of Fluids Engineering

[38] Iwatsu, R., K. Ishii, T. Kawamura, K. Kuwahara and J.M. Hyun, 1989, "Numerical
simulation of three-dimensional flow structure in a driven cavity," Fluid Dyn. Res., 5(3),
pp. 173-189.
[39] OpenFOAM, R., 2011, The open source CFD toolbox, The OpenFOAM Foundation
homepage: http://openfoam.com
[40] Moukalled, F., L. Mangani and M. Darwish, 2016, The finite volume method in
computational fluid dynamics, Springer, Switzerland, Chap. 1. ISBN: 978-3-319-16873-9
[41] OpenFOAM, R., (2011). "OpenFOAM programmer's guide",
http://foam.sourceforge.net/docs/Guides-a4/ProgrammersGuide.pdf
[42] Issa, R.I., 1986, "Solution of the implicitly discretised fluid flow equations by
operator-splitting," Journal of computational physics, 62(1), pp. 40-65.
[43] Hagan, M.T. and M.B. Menhaj, 1994, "Training feedforward networks with the
Marquardt algorithm," IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, 5(6), pp. 989-993.
[44] Marquardt, D.W., 1963, "An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear
parameters," Journal of the society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 11(2), pp.
431-441.
[45] Breiman, L., J. Friedman, C.J. Stone, R.A. Olshen, 1984, Classification and Regression
Trees, CRC press, FL, USA, Chap. 8. ISBN: 978-0-412-04841-8
[46] Hastie, T., R. Tibshirani and J. Friedman, 2009, The elements of statistical learning
2nd edition, Springer-Verlag New York, Chap. 15. ISBN: 978-0-387-84858-7
[47] Efron, B. and R. Tibshirani, 1993, An introduction to the bootstrap, CRC press, FL,
USA, Chap. 1. ISBN: 978-0412042317
[48] Koseff, J. and R. Street, 1984, "The lid-driven cavity flow: a synthesis of qualitative
and quantitative observations," ASME J.Fluids Eng, 106(12), pp. 390-398.
[49] Bouffanais, R., M.O. Deville and E. Leriche, 2007, "Large-eddy simulation of the flow
in a lid-driven cubical cavity," Phys. Fluids, 19(5), p. 055108.
[50] Le Cun, Y., Y. Bengio and G. Hinton, 2015, “Deep learning,” Nature, 521(7553), pp.
436-444.

41

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 1. Work-flow for data generation in the CG-CFD problem.

42

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 2. A method to predict CG-CFD error using ML algorithms.

43

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 3. Lid driven cubic cavity. The lid velocity is parallel to 𝑥 axis.

44

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 4. A snapshot of the velocity (𝑈𝑦 ) profile in a three-dimensional quasi steady state
turbulent flow in a lid driven cavity. The lid is moving in 𝑥 direction. The profile is
computed with a fine grid (left) and a coarse-grid (right). The fine grid result is mapped to
a coarse-grid (in the middle).

45

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Table 1. Normalization factors for different variables.
Feature

Normalization factor

𝛥

𝐻

𝑑𝑢𝑖
( )
𝑑𝑥𝑗

𝐻 ⁄𝑈𝑙𝑖𝑑

𝑑2 𝑢𝑖
)
𝑑𝑥𝑗 2

𝐻 2 ⁄𝑈𝑙𝑖𝑑

𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ), 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑦 ), 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑧 )

𝑈𝑙𝑖𝑑

(

46

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Table 2. Training and testing flows. 𝑅𝑒 and 𝛥 are the Reynolds number and the grid
spacing, respectively.
Scenario

Training flows

Testing flow

𝑅𝑒

𝛥 (𝑚)

𝑅𝑒

𝛥 (𝑚)

I: 𝑅𝑒 interpolation.

{6000, 8000, 12000}

1
30

10000

1
30

II:
𝑅𝑒
extrapolation
(higher 𝑅𝑒).

{6000, 8000, 10000}

1
30

12000

1
30

III:
𝑅𝑒
extrapolation
(lower 𝑅𝑒).

{ 8000, 10000, 12000}

1
30

6000

1
30

{

1 1
, }
40 20

12000

1
30

{

1 1
, }
30 20

12000

1
40

{

1 1
, }
40 30

12000

1
20

{

1 1
, }
40 20

10000

1
30

{

1 1
, }
30 20

12000

1
40

{

1 1
, }
40 30

8000

1
20

IV: ∆ interpolation.

12000

V: ∆ extrapolation (finer
grid).

12000

VI:
∆
extrapolation
(coarser grid).

12000

∆

{ 8000, 12000}

VIII:
𝑅𝑒
and
∆
extrapolation (higher 𝑅𝑒
and finer grid)

{ 8000, 10000}

IX: 𝑅𝑒 and ∆ extrapolation
(lower and coarser grid).

{ 10000, 12000}

VII:
𝑅𝑒
interpolation.

and

47

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 5. Regression tree.

48

Journal of Fluids Engineering

0

Y (m)
0.5

1

1
Experiment
0.8

0.0083m + wall refinement
0.0167m + wall refinement
0.0167m

Ux (m)

0.6

0.0333m
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0

X (m)
0.5

1

0.2

0.1

Uy (m/s)

0
-0.1
-0.2

-0.3
-0.4
Fig. 6. The axial profile (𝑦 direction) for velocity, 𝑈𝑥 (top) and the axial profile (𝑥
direction for the velocity, 𝑈𝑦 (bottom) at 𝑅𝑒 = 12000.

49

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 7. ANN performance in scenario I (training flows). MSE vs. the number of iterations
(epochs) (above). 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ) expected by ANN vs. the actual 𝜀𝛥 (𝑈𝑥 ) (below).
50

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 8. Scenario I for 𝑈𝑥 (by ANN). ∆= 0.033𝑚. Training data (above) and testing data
(below). CG: Coarse grid predictions. ML: Machine learning predictions.

51

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 9. RFR OOB error decreases with increasing number of trees.

52

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 10. Scenario I for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). ∆= 0.033𝑚. Training data (above) and testing data
(below).

53

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 11. Scenario II for 𝑈𝑥 (by ANN). ∆= 0.033𝑚. Training data (above) and testing data
(below).

54

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 12. Scenario II for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). ∆= 0.033𝑚. Training data (above) and testing data
(below).

55

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 13. Scenario III for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). ∆= 0.033𝑚. Training data (above) and testing data
(below).

56

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 14. Scenario IV for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). 𝑅𝑒 = 12000. Training data (above) and
testing data (below).

57

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 15. Scenario V for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). 𝑅𝑒 = 12000. Training data (above) and testing data
(below).

58

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 16. Scenario VI for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). 𝑅𝑒 = 12000. Training data (above) and testing data
(below).

59

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 17. Scenario VII for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). Training data (above) and testing data (below).

60

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 18. Scenario VIII for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). Training data (above) and testing data (below).

61

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 19. Scenario IX for 𝑈𝑥 (by RFR). Training data (above) and testing data (below).

62

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 20. Scenario VII for Uy (by RFR). Training data (above) and testing data (below).

63

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 21. Scenario VIII for 𝑈𝑦 (by RFR). Training data (above) and testing data (below).

64

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 22. Scenario VII for 𝑈𝑧 (by RFR). Training data (above) and testing data (below).

65

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Fig. 23. Scenario VIII for 𝑈𝑧 (by RFR). Training data (above) and testing data (below).

66

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Table 3. A comparison between different scenarios in terms of ML error and
computational expense.
Scenario

ML

Training data

Testing data

Mean
(𝐸𝑀𝐿 )

Max
(𝐸𝑀𝐿 )

Computational
time (minutes)

Mean
(𝐸𝑀𝐿 )

Max
(𝐸𝑀𝐿 )

I

ANN

0.3

3.5

12.9

0.4

3.4

I

RFR

0.06

1.5

11.1

0.3

2.8

II

ANN

0.3

7.6

13

0.4

7

II

RFR

0.06

1

11.2

0.4

2.7

III

0.07

1.3

11.3

0.4

2.9

IV

0.05

2

6.4

0.3

3

V

0.05

1.1

3

0.4

4

VI

0.05

1.9

8.2

0.4

2

VII

0.06

1.5

22

0.3

4.6

VIII

0.06

1.2

13.3

0.3

3.3

IX

0.07

1.8

32.3

0.4

2.3

VII

0.06

2.2

14.9

0.3

4.9

VIII

0.07

1.9

6.3

0.3

4.6

VII

0.1

5.3

17.2

0.6

10

VIII

0.1

4.6

6

0.7

13.1

Variable of
interest

𝑈𝑥

𝑈𝑦

𝑈𝑧

67

Journal of Fluids Engineering

Table 4. Data convergence study.
#

Testing flows

Training flows

Testing

data

mean 𝐸𝑀𝐿
I

𝑅𝑒 = 12000,
𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

Testing data
maximum 𝐸𝑀𝐿

𝑅𝑒 = 6000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

0.4

3.21

𝑅𝑒 = 6000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

0.36

2.78

0.35

2.71

𝑅𝑒 = 10000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

0.4

2.67

𝑅𝑒 = 10000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 8000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

0.36

2.63

𝑅𝑒 = 10000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 8000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 6000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

0.35

2.71

𝑅𝑒 = 12000, 𝛥 = 1/20𝑚

0.5

4.63

𝑅𝑒 = 12000, 𝛥 = 1/20𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 12000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

0.38

4

𝑅𝑒 = 12000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

0.39

3.89

𝑅𝑒 = 12000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 12000, 𝛥 = 1/20𝑚

0.38

4

𝑅𝑒 = 8000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 6000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 8000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
𝑅𝑒 = 10000, 𝛥 = 1/30𝑚
II

III

IV

𝑅𝑒 = 12000,
𝛥 = 1/30𝑚

𝑅𝑒 = 12000,
𝛥 = 1/40𝑚

𝑅𝑒 = 12000,
𝛥 = 1/40𝑚

68

