                                                                                    SAND2016-7345J

     Reynolds Averaged Turbulence Modeling using Deep Neural
                        Networks with Embedded Invariance

                               Julia Ling∗ and Jeremy Templeton
                                  Sandia National Laboratories
                       Thermal/Fluid Sciences and Engineering Department
                                             Livermore, CA

                                       Andrew Kurzawski
                                 University of Texas at Austin
                              Mechanical Engineering Department
                                              Austin, TX
                                      (Dated: July 24, 2016)

                                               Abstract
    There exists significant demand for improved Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) turbu-
lence models. This paper presents a method of using deep neural networks to learn a model for
the Reynolds stress anisotropy tensor from high fidelity simulation data. A novel neural network
architecture is proposed which uses a multiplicative layer with an invariant tensor basis to em-
bed Galilean invariance into the predicted anisotropy tensor. It is demonstrated that this neural
network architecture provides improved prediction accuracy compared to a generic neural network
architecture which does not embed this invariance property. The Reynolds stress anisotropy pre-
dictions of this invariant neural network are propagated through to the velocity field for two test
cases. For both test cases, significant improvement versus baseline RANS linear eddy viscosity and
non-linear eddy viscosity models is demonstrated.

PACS numbers: 47.27.em, 47.27.eb, 02.20.-a




∗
    jling@sandia.gov


                                                  1
I.    INTRODUCTION


     Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (RANS) models are widely used because of their com-
putational tractability. Most two-equation RANS models rely on the Linear Eddy Viscosity
Model (LEVM) for their Reynolds stress closure. The LEVM postulates a linear relationship
between the Reynolds stresses and the mean strain rate. However, this model does not pro-
vide satisfactory predictive accuracy in many engineering-relevant flows, such as those with
curvature, impingement, and separation [1, 2]. In particular, it has been demonstrated that
the LEVM does not capture the correct Reynolds stress anisotropy in many flows, includ-
ing simple shear flows [3]. More advanced non-linear eddy viscosity models have also been
proposed [1, 4, 5] which rely on higher order products of the mean strain rate and mean
rotation rate tensors. These non-linear models have not gained widespread usage because
they do not give consistent performance improvement over the LEVM and often lead to
worsened convergence and stability properties [6, 7].

     More recently, there has been interest in using machine learning methods to develop
Reynolds stress closures. Tracey et al. [3] used kernel regression to model the Reynolds
stress anisotropy eigenvalues. This method was shown to have limited ability to generalize
to new flows and to scale to large amounts of training data. Tracey et al. [8] later used
neural networks with a single hidden layer to model the source terms from the Spalart
Allmaras RANS model. These neural networks were shown capable of reconstructing these
source terms, demonstrating the potential utility of neural networks for turbulence modeling.
Zhang and Duraisamy [9] investigated applications of neural networks to predict a correction
factor for the turbulent production term. Parish and Duraisamy [10] proposed the use of
Gaussian processes to provide closure models for modeling terms inferred through Bayesian
inversion. These Gaussian processes, however, are not easily scalable to larger data sets.
Ling et al. [11] and Xiao et al. [12] proposed the use of Random Forests to predict the
Reynolds stress anisotropy. However, Random Forests are limited in their ability to predict
the full anisotropy tensor because they cannot easily enforce Galilean invariance for a tensor
prediction.

     Deep neural networks, also referred to as deep learning, are a branch of machine learning in
which input features are transformed through multiple layers of non-linear interactions [13].
Deep neural networks have gained attention for their ability to represent complex interactions

                                               2
and achieve superior results across a wide range of applications, including video classifica-
tion [14], voice recognition [15], and playing the game of Go [16]. Despite the widespread
success of neural networks at providing high quality predictions in complex problems, there
have been only limited attempts to apply deep learning techniques to turbulence modeling.
Zhang and Duraisamy [9] and Tracey et al. [3] used neural networks with only one or two
hidden layers. Milano and Koumoutsakos [17] used neural networks with multiple hidden
layers to replicate near wall channel flows, but did not build these neural networks into
forward models for turbulence model prediction. This paper will demonstrate the utility of
deep neural networks for providing improved Reynolds stress closures for RANS turbulence
models.


  A key strength of neural networks is in the flexibility of their architecture. While Ran-
dom Forests cannot easily be restructured to preserve tensor invariance properties, neural
networks can be. Ling et al. [18] used Random Forests and neural networks to predict the
Reynolds stress anisotropy eigenvalues, and showed significant performance gains when a
rotationally invariant input feature set was used. These results showed that embedding
invariance properties into the machine learning model is critical for achieving high perfor-
mance. In the current work, a specialized neural network architecture is proposed which
embeds Galilean invariance into the neural network predictions. This neural network is
able to predict not only the anisotropy eigenvalues, but the full anisotropy tensor while
preserving Galilean invariance. The neural network model is trained and evaluated on a
database of flows for which both RANS and high fidelity (Direct Numerical Simulation or
well-resolved Large Eddy Simulation) data are available. The performance of this specialized
neural network is compared to that of a more generic feed forward multi-layer perceptron.


  Section II will introduce the concepts of deep neural networks and will present the archi-
tecture and training and validation procedures for the multi-layer perceptron neural network
and the specialized invariant neural network. Section III will detail the data sets used for
training, validation, and testing. Section IV will present the a priori results of the neural
networks in predicting the Reynolds stress anisotropy as well as the a posteriori results of
the velocity fields calculated when using these Reynolds stress closures. Finally, Section V
will present conclusions and ideas for next steps.

                                             3
II.     DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS


      Neural networks are composed of connected nodes. Each node takes in inputs ~x, trans-
forms the inputs through an activation function f (~x), and outputs the result, as shown in
                                                                       ~ T ~x, tanh functions:
Fig. 1. Common activation functions include linear functions: f (~x) = w
              ~ T ~x), and the rectified linear unit (ReLU): f (~x) = max(0, w
f (~x) = tanh(w                                                              ~ T ~x). In these func-
tions, w
       ~ are node weights which are set during the training phase of the model. The leaky
ReLU activation function is an adaptation of ReLU with a small negative slope for negative
          ~ T ~x. The leaky ReLU was employed in the neural networks discussed in this paper
values of w
because it enables efficient training of deep neural networks [19]. In deep neural networks,
there are multiple layers of nodes, with the outputs of one layer becoming the inputs to the
next layer. By using multiple layers of transformations, deep neural networks are able to
capture complex, hierarchical interactions between features. The layers between the input
layer and the output layer are called hidden layers because the physical interpretation of
their activation is not always clear.

      The inputs to the neural networks were based on the mean strain rate tensor S and the
mean rotation rate tensor R, non-dimensionalized using the turbulent kinetic energy k and
the turbulent dissipation rate  as suggested by Pope [5]. The output was the normalized
                                                      u0i u0j
Reynolds stress anisotropy tensor, b, where bij =      2k
                                                              − 13 δij .

      The neural networks were trained using back propagation with gradient descent. The pro-
cess of training a neural network is analogous to calibrating a regression model. In training,
the model is fit to a subset of the data, known as the training data, by iteratively adjusting
the node weights to provide the lowest mean squared error between the predicted and true
values of the anisotropy tensor. Back-propagation is a method of efficiently calculating the
derivative of the mean squared error with respect to node weights in each layer of the neural
network. Once these gradients are calculated, the node weights are updated using gradient
descent. For the multi-layer perceptron (MLP), mini-batch gradient descent was employed,
in which the gradient-based updates were averaged over a random subset of the training data
to reduce noise. For the Tensor Basis Neural Network (TBNN), stochastic gradient descent
was used, in which the weights were updated after each training point. This technique was
used to facilitate the implementation of a multiplicative layer, as detailed in the following
sections.

                                                4
                         FIG. 1. Schematic of neural network node.




                        FIG. 2. Schematic of Multi-Layer Perceptron.


  For both neural network architectures, there were three main hyper-parameters that had
to be fit: the number of hidden layers, the number of nodes per hidden layer, and the
learning rate in the gradient descent algorithm. All three of these parameters can have
a significant effect on model performance. Larger networks (with more hidden layers and
more nodes per layer) can fit more complex data, but are also more prone to over-fitting
the data. These three hyper-parameters were determined through a Bayesian optimization
process that sampled the parameter space efficiently to find the parameters that yielded the
best performance. The neural network performance was evaluated on a validation data set
that was different from both the training data and the test data. The Spearmint python
package [20] was used to implement the Bayesian optimization process.



  A.   Multi-Layer Perceptron


  An MLP is the most basic type of neural network: it is a densely connected feed-forward
neural network. Feed-forward means that there are no loops in the connections between
the nodes. Densely connected means that each node in a given layer is connected to all the
nodes in the next layer. Fig. 2 shows a schematic of an MLP.
  The inputs to the MLP were the 9 distinct components of the non-dimensionalized strain

                                            5
                         FIG. 3. Schematic of Tensor Basis Neural Network.


rate and rotation rate tensors, S and R, at a given point in the flow as predicted by RANS.
Through Bayesian optimization, the network was set to have 10 hidden layers, each with 10
nodes, and the learning rate was 2.5e-6.



   B.   Tensor Basis Neural Network


   A special network architecture, which will be referred to as the Tensor Basis Neural Net-
work (TBNN), is proposed. This network architecture, shown in Fig. 3, embeds rotational
invariance by enforcing that the predicted anisotropy tensor lies on a basis of isotropic ten-
sors. Rotational invariance signifies that the physics of the fluid flow do not depend on the
orientation of the coordinate frame of the observer. This is a fundamental physical principle,
and it is important that any turbulence closure obeys it. Otherwise, the machine learning
model evaluated on identical flows with the axes defined in different directions could yield
different predictions.
   If the goal were just to predict the eigenvalues of the anisotropy tensor, then a basis
of scalar invariants could be used as the input features to ensure the rotational invariance
of the predicted eigenvalues, as was shown by Ling et al. [18]. However, to predict the

                                               6
full anisotropy tensor, this approach is not sufficient. Unlike the anisotropy eigenvalues,
the full anisotropy tensor will change when the coordinate axes are rotated. The key to
ensuring Galilean invariance is therefore to ensure that when the coordinate frame is rotated,
the anisotropy tensor is also rotated by the same angles. Therefore, if the input to the
neural network is a rotated velocity gradient tensor, the output should be the corresponding
rotated anisotropy tensor. This can be achieved by constructing an integrity basis of the
input tensors. Further explanation of integrity bases for isotropic functions can be found in
Ref. [21].
   For the specific case of interest here, with input tensors S and R, Pope [5] has previously
derived the relevant integrity basis. Pope proved that in the most general case, an eddy
viscosity model for incompressible flow that is a function of only S and R can be expressed
as a linear combination of 10 isotropic basis tensors:


                                           10
                                           X
                                     b=          g (n) (λ1 , ..., λ5 )T(n)                 (1)
                                           n=1


   Any tensor b which satisfies this condition will automatically satisfy Galilean invariance.
There are only a finite number of tensors because by the Caley-Hamilton theory, higher
order products of these two tensors can be reduced to a linear combination of this tensor
basis. The 5 tensor invariants λ1 , ..., λ5 are known scalar functions of the elements of S and
R. Pope [5] gave a detailed derivation of these 10 tensors, T(1) , ..., T(10) and 5 invariants
λ1 , ..., λ5 , which are listed below:


                                                                    2
              T(1) =S                             T(6) =R2 S + SR2 − I · T r(SR2 )
                                                                    3
              T(2) =SR − RS                       T(7) =RSR2 − R2 SR
                        1
              T(3) =S2 − I · T r(S2 )             T(8) =SRS2 − S2 RS                       (2)
                        3
                         1                                             2
              T(4) =R2 − I · T r(R2 )             T(9) =R2 S2 + S2 R2 − I · T r(S2 R2 )
                         3                                             3
              T(5) =RS2 − S2 R                   T(10) =RS2 R2 − R2 S2 R


                          λ1 = T r(S2 ),     λ2 = T r(R2 ),           λ3 = T r(S3 )

                                         λ4 = T r(R2 S),         λ5 = T r(R2 S2 )

                                                     7
   The goal of the TBNN, then, is to determine the scalar coefficients g (n) (λ1 , ..., λ5 ) in Eq. 1.
Once these coefficients are determined, then Eq. 1 can be used to solve for the anisotropy
tensor b.
   As Fig. 3 shows, the network architecture was designed to match Eq. 1. There are two
input layers: an Invariant Input Layer and a Tensor Input Layer. The Invariant Input Layer
takes in the 5 invariants λ1 , ..., λ5 , and is followed by a series of hidden layers. The Final
Hidden Layer has 10 elements and represents g (n) for n = 1, ..., 10. The output from these
10 nodes is then multiplied by the Tensor Input Layer, which also has 10 nodes. These 10
nodes represent the 10 tensors T(n) for n = 1, ..., 10. The Merge Output Layer performs
element-wise multiplication between the outputs of the Final Hidden Layer and the Tensor
Input Layer and then sums the result to give the final prediction for b. This innovative
architecture ensures that Eq. 1 is satisfied, thereby guaranteeing the Galilean invariance of
the network predictions.
   Because of this final multiplicative layer, stochastic gradient descent was used during
network training. While noisier, this method was more convenient to implement given the
added complexity of back-propagation through a multiplicative layer. Through Bayesian
optimization, the number of hidden layers was set to 8, with 30 nodes per hidden layer. The
learning rate was 2.5e-7.



III.   DATA SETS


   The neural networks were trained, validated, and tested on a database of 9 flows for
which both high fidelity (DNS or well-resolved LES) as well as RANS results were available.
The RANS data, obtained using the k −  model with a Linear Eddy Viscosity Model for
the Reynolds stresses, were used as the inputs to the neural networks. The high fidelity
data were used to provide the truth labels for the Reynolds stress anisotropy during model
training and evaluation.
   The nine flows in the database were selected because of the availability of high fidelity
data and because they represent canonical flow cases. All of the high fidelity simulation
results have been previously reported in the literature. 6 cases were used for training: Duct
flow at Reb = 3500 [22], channel flow at Reτ = 590 [23], a perpendicular jet in crossflow [24],
an inclined jet in crossflow [25], flow around a square cylinder [26, 27], and flow through

                                                8
a converging-diverging channel [28]. One case was used for validation when selecting the
neural network hyper-parameters through Bayesian optimization: a wall-mounted cube in
crossflow at bulk Reynolds number of 5000 [29]. Two cases were used for testing: duct flow
at Reb = 2000 and flow over a wavy wall at Re = 6850. These cases were chosen for test
sets because they are both flows in which Reynolds stress anisotropy plays a key role.
   It is notable that this flow database represents a wide variety of different flow configu-
rations. We are therefore testing the ability of the neural network to do more than just
interpolate between similar flow configurations at different Reynolds numbers; we are eval-
uating the ability of the neural network to learn about the underlying flow regimes present
in these configurations.


IV.     RESULTS


   A.    A Priori Results


   The MLP and TBNN were used to predict the normalized Reynolds stress anisotropy
tensor b for two different test flow cases: turbulent duct flow and flow over a wavy wall.
Figures 4 shows the anisotropy predictions for the duct flow case. For comparison, the
anisotropy predictions from two different baseline RANS simulations are also shown. The
first RANS was run using the default Linear Eddy Viscosity Model (LEVM): b = −νkt S . The
second RANS used a Quadratic Eddy Viscosity Model (QEVM) based on Craft’s non-linear
eddy viscosity model [1]:

                      νt Sij     νt          2
             bij = −         + C1 (2Sik Skj − Skl Skl δij )
                        k        ˜          3                                              (3)
                         νt                         νt          2
                    + C2 (2Rik Skj + 2Rjk Ski ) + C3 (2Rik Rjk − Rkl Rkl δij )
                          ˜                         ˜         3
In this model, the coefficients are set as C1 = −0.1, C2 = 0.1, and C3 = 0.26.
   As Fig. 4 shows, the baseline LEVM completely failed to predict the anisotropy values.
It predicted zero anisotropy for b11 , b22 , b33 , and b12 . This is due to the fact that the
LEVM model does not predict any secondary flows in the duct, so the mean velocity in the
x1 and x2 directions is zero, causing S11 , S22 , and S12 to be zero. Since the flow is periodic
in the x3 direction, S33 is also zero. As a result, the corresponding b components are zero,
as shown. The QEVM does slightly better, predicting the right sign, though still too small

                                              9
                x2
                     x1
                          LEVM QEVM TBNN                  MLP        DNS

                b11

                b22

                b33

                b12

                b23

                b13




FIG. 4. Predictions of Reynolds stress anisotropy tensor b on the duct flow test case. Only the
lower left quadrant of the duct is shown, and the streamwise flow direction is out of the page. The
columns show the predictions of the LEVM, QEVM, TBNN, and MLP models. The true DNS
anisotropy values are shown in the right-most column for comparison.


a magnitude, for these components of b. The TBNN does even better, getting closer to the
correct magnitude for the components of b. The MLP, on the other hand, completely fails
to predict the anisotropy in this configuration. Its predictions are both qualitatively and
quantitatively inaccurate.

   A more quantitative comparison of these model performances is given by Table I, which
provides the root mean squared error (RMSE) for these four models with respect to the DNS

                                               10
                   LEVM       QEVM         TBNN           MLP       DNS

            b11


            b22


            b33



            b12



FIG. 5. Predictions of Reynolds stress anisotropy b tensor on the wavy wall test case. The columns
show the predictions of the LEVM, QEVM, TBNN, and MLP models. The true DNS anisotropy
values are shown in the right-most column for comparison.


data. This table confirms that the TBNN provides by far the most accurate predictions in
this case: 43% more accurate than the LEVM and 28% more accurate than the QEVM.
   Figure 5 shows the anisotropy predictions on the wavy wall test case. b13 and b23 are
not shown because they are identically zero in this 2-D test case. Once again, the LEVM is
unable to predict even the qualitative trends in the anisotropy components, and the QEVM
is only slightly better, predicting the correct sign for the on-diagonal components of b. The


                       TABLE I. Root Mean Squared Error on Test Cases
                       Model Duct Flow             Flow over Wavy Wall

                       LEVM 0.23                   0.18

                       QEVM 0.18                   0.11

                       TBNN 0.13                   0.08

                       MLP     0.33                0.09


                                              11
TBNN predicts closer to the correct magnitude for the on-diagonal components of b. For
the b12 component, it predicts too low of anisotropy near the center of the channel. Once
again, the MLP is unable to make satisfactory predictions for the anisotropy in this flow.
   Table I lists the RMSE values for each of the four models in the wavy wall test case. Once
again, the TBNN provides the predictions with the lowest error, giving a 56% reduction
in error with respect to LEVM and a 27% reduction in error with respect to QEVM. In
this case, the MLP surpasses LEVM and QEVM, but still falls short of the TBNN in
accuracy. Therefore, on both test cases, the TBNN has been shown to provide substantial
reductions in error with respect to the baseline RANS models. The TBNN has also been
shown to be consistently more accurate than the MLP, emphasizing the performance benefits
of embedding invariance into the network architecture.



   B.    A Posteriori Results


   Given the significantly improved Reynolds stress anisotropy predictions of the TBNN,
it was of interest to determine whether these improved anisotropy values would translate
to improved mean velocity predictions. Therefore, the Reynolds stress anisotropy tensor
predicted by the TBNN was implemented in an in-house RANS solver, SIERRA Fuego [30],
in the momentum equations and in the turbulent kinetic energy production term. Notably,
the Reynolds stress anisotropy is not the only source of uncertainty in the RANS equations,
which also relies on approximate transport equations for k and . Therefore, the true DNS
anisotropy values were also implemented in the RANS solver as a point of comparison. This
DNS anisotropy (DNS-b) model shows the flow predictions that would be achieved by using
the correct normalized anisotropy tensor b, given the other RANS model assumptions. It
therefore represents the upper performance limit of an improved Reynolds stress anisotropy
model.
   In the duct flow test case, one of the major failings of LEVM is that it cannot predict
the corner vortices that are known to form in this flow. Figure 6 shows the secondary flow
predictions made by the LEVM, QEVM, TBNN, DNS-b, and the true DNS. As this figure
shows, the LEVM does not predict any secondary flows at all. The QEVM predicts corner
vortices, but significantly under-predicts their strength. The TBNN, on the other hand,
over-predicts the strength of these vortices, with incorrect counter-rotating vortices forming

                                            12
                    (a)LEVM                (b)QEVM                   (c)TBNN




                               (d)DNS-b                (e)True DNS

FIG. 6. Plot of secondary flows in duct flow case. Reference arrows of length Ub /10 shown at the
top of each plot.




near the center of the channel. The DNS-b slightly over-predicts the strength of the corner
vortices, but is overall the most accurate, unsurprisingly. In this test case, then, while the
TBNN provides improved secondary flow predictions, it is still not able to correctly capture
the strength and shape of the corner vortices.

   In the case of periodic flow over a wavy wall, the DNS shows flow separation on the
leeward side of the bump. RANS struggles to correctly capture this separation region.
Figure 7 shows contours of streamwise velocity for this flow case. The RANS LEVM and
QEVM both fail to predict flow separation downstream of the bump. The DNS-b correctly
predicts the size and shape of the separated region. TBNN predicts flow separation, though
in a smaller region than the DNS.

   In both test cases, the TBNN improvements in predicting the anisotropy tensor yield
more accurate velocity predictions in comparison to RANS LEVM and QEVM. On the

                                              13
                   (a)LEVM                  (b)QEVM                   (c)TBNN




                            (d)DNS-b                    (e)True DNS

           FIG. 7. Contours of streamwise velocity. Separated regions outlined in black.



other hand, there is still room for improved RANS predictions, as is shown by the DNS-b
results.



V.    CONCLUSIONS


     A deep learning approach to RANS turbulence modeling was presented which embedded
Galilean invariance into the network architecture using a higher order multiplicative layer.
This architecture used concepts from representation theory to ensure that the predicted
anisotropy tensor lay on a invariant tensor basis. This invariant Tensor Basis Neural Net-
work was shown to have significantly more accurate predictions than a generic multi-layer
perceptron that did not have any embedded invariance properties.
     The accuracy of the TBNN was explored in both an a priori and an a posteriori sense.
The Reynolds stress anisotropy predictions were compared to those of the default LEVM

                                               14
RANS model, as well as a non-linear eddy viscosity model. The TBNN anisotropy predic-
tions were shown to be significantly more accurate than either of these two conventional
RANS models on two different test cases. Notably, both of the test cases represented chal-
lenges for the TBNN. While there was also a duct flow test case in the training set, the test
case was at a significantly different Reynolds number, and therefore had distinctly different
anisotropy and secondary flows. The wavy wall test case was a completely different geome-
try than any of the training cases. The fact that the TBNN was able to provide improved
predictions in this test case demonstrates that the TBNN learned about the underlying flow
regimes and has the capability to extrapolate to new flow cases.
  The a posteriori evaluation showed that the TBNN was able to predict corner vortices
in the duct flow case and flow separation in the wavy wall case, two key flow features that
the baseline LEVM model completely failed to predict. While the TBNN was not able
to perfectly reproduce the DNS results, it represents a significant step towards improved
RANS predictive accuracy. In order for this innovative approach to reach its full potential,
the TBNN needs to be trained and tested across a much broader set of a flows. Training
across more flows will improve the neural network accuracy, and testing across more flows
will enable uncertainty analysis for the TBNN predictions.


  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


  The authors wish to thank V. Brunini for his valuable support in the code implemen-
tation stage of this research. Funding for this work was provided by the Sandia LDRD
program, and its support is gratefully acknowledged. Sandia National Laboratories is a
multi-program laboratory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned
subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National
Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.




 [1] T. Craft, B. Launder, and K. Suga, International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 17, 108
    (1996).
 [2] S. Pope, “Turbulent flows,” (Cambridge University Press, 2000).
 [3] B. Tracey, K. Duraisamy, and J. Alonso, AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting , 2013 (2013).

                                            15
 [4] S. Wallin and A. Johansson, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 403, 89 (2000).
 [5] S. Pope, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 72, 331 (1975).
 [6] L. Belhoucine, M. Deville, A. Elazehari, and M. Bensalah, Computers and Fluids 33, 179
    (2004).
 [7] T. Gatski and C. Speziale, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 254, 59 (1993).
 [8] B. Tracey, K. Duraisamy, and J. Alonso, AIAA SciTech , 2015 (2015).
 [9] Z. Zhang and K. Duraisamy, AIAA Aviation , 2015 (2015).
[10] E. Parish and K. Duraisamy, Journal of computational physics 305, 758 (2016).
[11] J. Ling, A. Ruiz, G. Lacaze, and J. Oefelein, ASME Turbo Expo 2016 (2016).
[12] J. Wang, J. Wu, and H. Xiao, arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07987 (2016).
[13] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, Nature 521, 436 (2015).
[14] A. Karpathy, G. Toderici, S. Shetty, T. Leung, R. Sukthankar, and F. Li, Proceedings of the
    IEEE conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 1725 (2014).
[15] G. Hinton et al., IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 29, 82 (2012).
[16] D. Silver et al., Nature 529, 484 (2016).
[17] M. Milano and P. Koumoutsakos, Journal of Computational Physics 182, 1 (2002).
[18] J. Ling, R. Jones, and J. Templeton, Journal of Computational Physics 318, 22 (2016).
[19] A. Maas, A. Hannun, and A. Ng, Proceedings of ICML 30, 1 (2013).
[20] J. Snoek, H. Larochelle, and R. Adams, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
    , 2951 (2012).
[21] G. Smith, Archive for rational mechanics and analysis 18, 282 (1965).
[22] A. Pinelli, M. Uhlmann, A. Sekimoto, and G. Kawahara, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 644,
    107 (2010).
[23] R. Moser, J. Kim, and N. Mansour, Physics of Fluids 11, 943 (1999).
[24] A. Ruiz, J. Oefelein, and G. Lacaze, Physics of Fluids 27, 045101 (2015).
[25] J. Ling, K. Ryan, J. Bodart, and J. Eaton, in ASME Turbo Expo 2015 (ASME Turbo Expo,
    Montreal, Canada, 2015).
[26] J. Ray, S. Lefantzi, S. Arunajatesan, and L. Dechant, AIAA Paper , 2085 (2014).
[27] S. Lefantzi, J. Ray, S. Arunajatesan, and L. Dechant, Sandia Technical Report , SAND2015
    (2015).
[28] M. Marquillie, U. Ehrenstein, and J. Laval, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 681, 205 (2011).


                                                 16
[29] R. Rossi, D. Philips, and G. Iaccarino, International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 31, 805
    (2010).
[30] S. Domino, C. Moen, S. Burns, and G. Evans, AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting (2003),
    AIAA-2003-149.




                                              17
