         Development of a Generalizable Data-driven
 Turbulence Model: Conditioned Field Inversion and
                                 Symbolic Regression
                           Chenyu Wu1, Shaoguang Zhang1, Yufei Zhang1,*

        (1. School of Aerospace Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China)

                                                 Abstract
  This paper addresses the issue of predicting separated flows with Reynolds-averaged Navier–
Stokes (RANS) turbulence models, which are essential for many engineering tasks. Traditional
RANS models usually struggle with this task, so recent efforts have focused on data-driven methods
such as field inversion and machine learning (FIML) to correct this issue by adjusting the baseline
equations. However, these FIML methods often reduce accuracy in attached boundary layers. To
address this issue, we developed a “conditioned field inversion” technique. This method adjusts the
corrective factor 𝛽 (used by FIML) in the shear–stress transport (SST) model. It multiplies 𝛽 with
a shield function 𝑓𝑑 that is off in the boundary layer and on elsewhere. This maintains the accuracy
of the baseline model for the attached flows. We applied both conditioned and classic field inversion
to the NASA hump and a curved backward-facing step (CBFS), creating two datasets. These datasets
were used to train two models: SR-CND (from our new method) and SR-CLS (from the traditional
method). The SR-CND model matches the SR-CLS model in predicting separated flows in various
scenarios, such as periodic hills, the NLR7301 airfoil, the 3D SAE car model, and the 3D Ahmed
body, and outperforms the baseline SST model in the cases presented in the paper. Importantly, the
SR-CND model maintains accuracy in the attached boundary layers, whereas the SR-CLS model
does not. Therefore, the proposed method improves separated flow predictions while maintaining
the accuracy of the original model for attached flows, offering a better way to create data-driven
turbulence models.
Keywords: RANS turbulence modeling, field inversion, symbolic regression, machine learning


1. Introduction

Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations are widely used in daily engineering

applications. The equations are used to compute the mean velocity and pressure and, in the case of

compressible flow, the density. These equations rely on RANS turbulence models to describe flow



* Corresponding author, e-mail: zhangyufei@tsinghua.edu.cn
turbulence. The RANS method is computationally more efficient than high-fidelity methods such

as direct numerical simulation (DNS), large eddy simulation (LES), and detached eddy simulation

(DES). This makes the RANS method especially valuable in aerodynamic optimization and other

computationally intensive computational fluid dynamics (CFD) tasks. However, the RANS method

has persistent shortcomings in accurately predicting separated flows, primarily due to the various

assumptions and simplifications inherent in its modeling process. Consequently, improving the

ability of RANS models to predict separated flows is crucial, as this would significantly expand

their applicability and effectiveness in a broader range of engineering problems.



Recently, the field of RANS turbulence modeling has embraced data-driven methods [1][2]. Among

these approaches, machine learning (ML) models have emerged as a booster for traditional CFD

[3][4], particularly in addressing the complex challenge of separated flows faced by RANS

turbulence models [5]~[12]. A notable example of such an approach is the field inversion and

machine learning (FIML) method introduced by Duraisamy et al. [13]. The FIML approach involves

adding a spatially varying correction factor, referred to as 𝛽(𝐱), to the standard turbulence model

equations. This factor serves as a measure of the model's error. For instance, this correction factor

might be applied as a multiplier to the destruction term in the shear‒stress‒transport (SST) model’s

𝜔 equation. The next step involves solving an optimization problem, where the objective is to

minimize the discrepancy between the RANS model's predicted quantity of interest (QoI) and the

QoI derived from either high-fidelity methods or experimental data. This data assimilation process

is also known as field inversion. Once this optimization is complete, a machine learning model is

developed using the optimized 𝛽(𝐱) values. This model is designed to link local flow

characteristics to the correction factor. The resultant ML model can then be applied in new CFD

simulations to refine the turbulence model predictions. Variations of the FIML method have been

documented in other studies [14][15]. A key advantage of the FIML data assimilation step is its

ability to infer the entire 𝛽(𝐱) field using only sparse high-fidelity data [16], such as experimental

measurements, thus ensuring the wide applicability of the FIML method. The data assimilation step

in FIML also ensures that the subsequent ML step does not necessarily have to learn high-fidelity

Reynolds stress directly, bypassing many numerical issues caused by ML-predicted Reynolds stress

[17][18]. FIML has been used with considerable success in separated flow modeling tasks. Singh et
al. [19] built a model using a multilayer perceptron (MLP) model with FIML and predicted the stall

of wind turbine airfoils. Yan et al. [20][21] also used FIML with an MLP to address iced airfoils and

3-D separation flows around NASA’s FAITH Hill project [22]. O. Bidar et al. [23] used a novel

eigenspace perturbation method to place sensors in the region of highest uncertainty during field

inversion, which increased the efficiency of data assimilation. Yan et al. [24] incorporated

turbulence fluctuation features with FIML through a generative model, achieving performance gains

in the prediction of flow separation in periodic hills. Andrea et al. [27] modified the corrective-

multiplier’s expression, making it more suitable for the augmentation of turbomachinery flows.



While FIML models have shown success in modeling flows similar to those in their training sets,

challenges in their ability to generalize remain a concern. The generalizability of FIML models can

be classified into four distinct levels, as detailed in Table 1.

                             Table 1. L1 to L4 generalizability of the FIML model

                      Definition                                           Example

                                                   The model is trained on one periodic hill and can be
        The model performs well in a series of
L1                                                 generalized to other periodic hills with different aspect
        geometries similar to the training set.
                                                   ratios, such as [20].
        The model does not negatively affect       The model is trained on some separated flow cases and
L2      the baseline model’s accuracy in           can be as accurate as its baseline model on the zero-
        simple wall-attached flows.                pressure-gradient flat plate, such as [32]
                                                   (1) The model is trained on a case where separation is
                                                        caused by a blunt geometry and is tested to be
                                                        effective in other cases that have completely
        The model performs well in test cases           different blunt geometries and Reynolds numbers,
        that have separation features similar           such as [29].
L3      to the training set but completely         (2) The model is trained on a case where separation
        different geometries and Reynolds               starts from a smooth surface (caused by a negative
        numbers.                                        pressure gradient) and is tested to be effective on
                                                        other smooth surface separations that have
                                                        completely different geometries and Reynolds
                                                        numbers.
        The model performs well in a series of     The model can accurately predict separation caused by
L4      test cases with completely different       blunt geometry as well as separation starting from a
        separation features, geometries, and       smooth surface.
       Reynolds numbers.

Current research on FIML, as referenced in previous studies [19][20][21][23][24][27], primarily

focuses on testing Level 1 (L1) generalizability. Some models have demonstrated promising results

in achieving Level 3 (L3) generalizability [28][29]. However, L2 generalizability, which pertains to

a model’s ability to maintain accuracy in simpler wall-attached flows, is critically important. The

significance of L2 generalizability cannot be overstated, especially given that real-world scenarios

often involve both simple wall-attached flows and separated flows, which substantially influence

key metrics such as the drag coefficient. Consequently, Spalart suggested that fulfilling L2

generalizability should be treated as a hard constraint for data-driven turbulence models [30].

However, a notable gap in L2 generalizability was highlighted by Rumsey et al. [31], who found

that a FIML model trained on an adverse-pressure-gradient (APG) flat plate did not perform

accurately on a zero-pressure-gradient (ZPG) flat plate. This suggests that FIML models developed

using traditional approaches might lack effectiveness in L2 scenarios. To address this issue, Joel Ho

et al. [32] introduced a probabilistic FIML model. This model deactivates the corrective factor in

situations of high uncertainty, as determined by Gaussian process regression-based predictions. This

approach showed improved performance on the ZPG flat plate and NACA0012 airfoil without flow

separation (indicating enhanced L2 generalizability), although it did compromise the model's

effectiveness in improving separated flows (i.e., L1 and L3 generalizability). Another strategy to

boost L2 generalizability was pursued by Jäckel [33], who incorporated a strong inductive bias into

the FIML model’s structure. Jäckel implemented an interpretable, closed-form Gaussian radial basis

function (RBF) to maintain the accuracy of the baseline Spalart Allmaras (SA) model in ZPG flat

plate scenarios. However, this approach, possibly due to the strong inductive bias of the RBF, did

not sufficiently reduce the baseline SA model’s error in separated flows, leading to reduced

effectiveness in terms of L1 and L3 generalizability. Recently, a novel method called constrained

recalibration proposed by Bin et al. [34][35] has increased the data-driven turbulence model’s L2

generalizability nicely. The physical constraints related to the law of the wall are extracted as

algebraic relations and are preserved during the data-augmentation stage for the separated flows.

Bin et al. [34][35] show that the law of wall can indeed be preserved no matter how the constrained

recalibration model is adjusted, showing strong L2 generalizability. By now, the adjustable

parameters in the constrained recalibration model remain constant throughout the field. The FIML
method can be incorporated in the future to gain a better L3 generalizability.



This paper introduces a new approach named conditioned field inversion (FI-CND) aimed at

enhancing the L2 generalizability of FIML models while maintaining L1 and L3 generalizability.

This method builds upon the classic field inversion (FI-CLS) technique, retaining its basic algorithm

but innovating in how the corrective factor 𝛽(𝐱) is applied. Our focus is on refining the SST model.

The FI-CLS method directly multiplies the corrective factor 𝛽(𝐱) with the destruction term of the

𝜔 equation. In contrast, the proposed FI-CND method takes a different approach. The proposed FI-

CND method multiplies the destruction term with [𝛽(𝐱) − 1]𝑓𝑑 + 1 , where 𝑓𝑑 is a shielding

function introduced by Spalart et al. [36] for robust detached eddy simulation (DES). This function,

𝑓𝑑 , is zero within the boundary layer and one outside it. This means that the corrective factor 𝛽(𝐱)

is only active outside the boundary layer and is filtered out inside the boundary layer, thereby

maintaining the accuracy of the baseline model for wall-attached flows (L2 generalizability).

Essentially, this approach assumes that the baseline model accurately calculates the attached

boundary layer and requires no modification in this region. The filter-based approach has been used

in data-driven turbulence modeling literature to form a zonal turbulence model with non-linear

Reynolds stress correction [25], to detect the region with an adverse pressure gradient [26], or to

reduce the computational cost [27].To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there’s no work in the

current literature that uses the filter-based approach in the field inversion stage of FIML and uses it

to preserve the accuracy of the wall-attached flows. Both FI-CLS and FI-CND were applied to the

NASA hump case and the curved-backward-facing step (CBFS) case. These applications produced

two separate datasets for 𝛽(𝐱), each combining data from both cases. Following these steps, two

closed-form models for 𝛽 were developed using symbolic regression: SR-CLS for the FI-CLS

dataset and SR-CND for the FI-CND dataset. Symbolic regression was chosen in the machine-

learning phase of FIML due to its strong performance in separated flows or L3 generalizability

[28][29]. The results showed that both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models significantly improved the

performance in separated flows, including on different configurations such as periodic hills, the

NLR-7301 two-element airfoil, the 3D notchback SAE model, and the 3D Ahmed body. These

results demonstrate that the FI-CND method does not reduce the L3 generalizability of models based

on FI-CLS. Moreover, only the SR-CND model accurately predicted the skin friction coefficient in
the zero-pressure-gradient (ZPG) flat plate and the NACA0012 airfoil at a zero angle of attack. This

outcome highlights the effectiveness of our FI-CND method in achieving L2 generalizability, a

critical aspect for more accurate and reliable turbulence modeling in engineering applications.




2. Frameworks of conditioned field inversion and symbolic
     regression

In this section, we introduce the FIML framework that is applied to generate data-driven turbulence

models. We focus on augmenting the SST model. Figure 1 provides a visual guide for our

methodology. We first perform field inversion, including the classic version and the conditioned

version proposed in this paper, to obtain the corrective factor 𝛽(𝐱) from sparse high-fidelity data,

forming a dataset of 𝛽 and its corresponding local flow features denoted as vector 𝐰. Then, we

use symbolic regression to distill a mapping from 𝐰 to 𝛽 based on the dataset output by field

inversion. Finally, the expression 𝛽(𝐰) is integrated back into the turbulence model, replacing

𝛽(𝐱), making the resultant model ready to be applied to new cases. The following subsections

provide a more detailed description of the field inversion step and the symbolic regression step.




                            Figure 1. Basic flowchart of the FIML framework



2.1. Classic field inversion and conditioned field inversion

The baseline RANS model we aim to modify is the SST 2003 model [37] (abbreviated as SST

hereafter), which is widely used for engineering purposes. The transport equations of the SST model

are as follows:

                         ∂(𝜌𝑘) ∂(𝜌𝑢𝑗 𝑘)                  ∂                ∂𝑘
                              +         = 𝑃 − 𝛽 ∗ 𝜌𝜔𝑘 +     [(𝜇 + 𝜎𝑘 𝜇𝑡 )     ]
                           ∂𝑡    ∂𝑥𝑗                    ∂𝑥𝑗               ∂𝑥𝑗
                                                                                                  (1)
            ∂(𝜌𝜔) ∂(𝜌𝑢𝑗 𝜔) 𝛾            ∂                 ∂𝜔                 𝜌𝜎𝜔2 ∂𝑘 ∂𝜔
                 +        = 𝑃 − 𝜃𝜌𝜔2 +     [(𝜇 + 𝜎𝜔 𝜇 𝑇 )     ] + 2(1 − 𝐹1 )
              ∂𝑡    ∂𝑥𝑗    𝜈𝑡          ∂𝑥𝑗                ∂𝑥𝑗                 𝜔 ∂𝑥𝑗 ∂𝑥𝑗

where 𝑘 is the turbulent kinetic energy, 𝜔 is the specific dissipation rate, and 𝜇𝑡 is the eddy
viscosity. For a more detailed description of the SST model, the readers are referred to [37].

In classic field inversion (FI-CLS), such as [29], the spatially varying corrective factor 𝛽(𝐱) (𝐱 is

the spatial coordinate) is directly multiplied by the destruction term of 𝜔’s equation:
          ∂(𝜌𝜔) ∂(𝜌𝑢𝑗 𝜔) 𝛾                ∂                 ∂𝜔                 𝜌𝜎𝜔2 ∂𝑘 ∂𝜔
               +        = 𝑃 − 𝛽(𝐱)𝜃𝜌𝜔2 +     [(𝜇 + 𝜎𝜔 𝜇 𝑇 )     ] + 2(1 − 𝐹1 )                      (2)
            ∂𝑡    ∂𝑥𝑗    𝜈𝑡              ∂𝑥𝑗                ∂𝑥𝑗                 𝜔 ∂𝑥𝑗 ∂𝑥𝑗

Eq. (2) allows 𝛽(𝐱) to be modified anywhere in the flow field, including the attached boundary

layer. It is reduced to the baseline model if 𝛽(𝐱) = 1 everywhere. However, varying 𝛽(𝐱) from

its baseline value 1, particularly in the attached boundary layer, can disrupt the calibration of the

original model's constants, such as 𝛾 and 𝜃, which are crucial for accurate turbulence modeling

[34][35]. For example, in the original model (Eq. (1)), 𝛾, 𝜃, and 𝜎𝜔 are calibrated to fulfill the

following necessary condition for accurate resolution of the log layer [38]:

                                   𝜃 − 𝛽 ∗ 𝛾 = 𝜅 2 √𝛽 ∗ 𝜎𝜔 , 𝜅 = 0.41                               (3)

If we want the classic field inversion model in Eq. (2) to calculate the log layer accurately, a similar

necessary condition must hold:

                                 𝛽(𝐱)𝜃 − 𝛽 ∗ 𝛾 = 𝜅 2 √𝛽 ∗ 𝜎𝜔 , 𝜅 = 0.41                             (4)

By comparing Eqs. (3) and (4), it becomes clear that 𝛽(𝐱) must be equal to 1 within the logarithmic

layer for the conditions of Eq. (4) to be satisfied. Therefore, any deviation of 𝛽(𝐱) from 1 in the

logarithmic layer would compromise the model's ability to accurately represent the boundary layer

calibration. In addition, other calibrations, such as the wake-law calibration for boundary layers with

different pressure gradients [38], are also negatively affected by 𝛽(𝐱) ≠ 1 in the boundary layer.

The following structure is proposed for the multiplier of 𝜔’s destruction term in an attempt to solve

the problem shown above:
                ∂(𝜌𝜔) ∂(𝜌𝑢𝑗 𝜔) 𝛾                              ∂                 ∂𝜔
                     +        = 𝑃 − [(𝛽(𝐱) − 1)𝑓𝑑 + 1]𝜃𝜌𝜔2 +     [(𝜇 + 𝜎𝜔 𝜇 𝑇 )     ]
                  ∂𝑡    ∂𝑥𝑗    𝜈𝑡                            ∂𝑥𝑗                ∂𝑥𝑗
                                                                                                    (5)
                                               𝜌𝜎𝜔2 ∂𝑘 ∂𝜔
                                  + 2(1 − 𝐹1 )
                                                𝜔 ∂𝑥𝑗 ∂𝑥𝑗

Similarly, Eq. (5) is reduced to the baseline model’s 𝜔 equation when 𝛽(𝐱) = 1 everywhere. The

shielding function 𝑓𝑑 was constructed by Spalart et al. in [36] and has the following form:
                                                                    𝜇 + 𝜇𝑇
                         𝑓𝑑 = 1 − tanh[(8𝑟𝑑 )3 ] ,      𝑟𝑑 =                                        (6)
                                                               𝜌𝜅 2 𝑑 2   √𝑢𝑖,𝑗 𝑢𝑖,𝑗
where 𝑑 is the wall distance and 𝑢𝑖,𝑗 = 𝜕𝑢𝑖 /𝜕𝑥𝑗 . 𝑓𝑑 is constructed such that it is 0 inside the

boundary layer and 1 outside. In practical use, the attached boundary layer typically falls within the
region where the shielding function 𝑓𝑑 is zero, as illustrated in Figure 2. Implementing 𝑓𝑑 in Eq.

(5) ensures that the destruction term remains 𝜃𝜌𝜔2 in this shielded area. This means that within

the attached boundary layer, the model functions identically to the baseline SST model, thereby

preserving all of its original calibrations. Outside this shielded region, the corrective factor 𝛽(𝐱)

comes into play, modifying the destruction term to 𝛽(𝐱)𝜃𝜌𝜔2 . This approach is justified, as

research [39][40] has indicated that inaccuracies in RANS turbulence models, especially in

predicting flow separation, mostly arise in the separated shear layer—an area outside the shielded

region. This method of applying 𝛽(𝐱) in Eq. (5) is called conditioned field inversion (FI-CND). It

maintains the reliability of the baseline model in the boundary layer while allowing for adjustments

where the model typically faces uncertainty.




                                   Figure 2. Typical 𝑓𝑑 distribution

For both FI-CLS and the FI-CND, the optimized 𝛽(𝐱) that can minimize the difference between

the RANS prediction and high-fidelity data is determined by solving the following optimization

problem (in discrete form):
                                       𝐾                           𝑁
                                                                           2
                        min 𝐽 = 𝜆𝑄𝑜𝐼 ∑[𝑑𝑖 − ℎ𝑖 (𝜷)]2 + 𝜆𝐿2 ∑(𝛽𝑗 − 1)                             (7)
                         𝜷
                                      𝑖=1                        𝑗=1

𝛽𝑗 is 𝛽(𝐱)’s value in the 𝑗𝑡ℎ cell in the CFD simulation, and 𝜷 is the vector whose 𝑗𝑡ℎ element

is 𝛽𝑗 . 𝑑𝑖 is the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ high-fidelity quantity-of-interest (QoI) data point, such as the 𝑥 -velocity

obtained by LES or DNS. ℎ𝑖 (𝜷) is the RANS-predicted QoI data point induced by a specific 𝛽(𝐱)

distribution represented discretely by 𝜷. 𝐾 is the number of sparse high-fidelity samples, and 𝑁

is the number of cells used in the CFD simulation. The first term of 𝐽 measures the difference

between the high-fidelity data and the RANS result, and the second term represents the deviation of

𝛽(𝐱) from its baseline value 1. 𝜆𝑄𝑜𝐼 and 𝜆𝐿2 are two constants. In this study, 𝜆𝑄𝑜𝐼 ≈

                2 −1
[∑(𝑑𝑖 − ℎ𝑖 (𝟏)) ]      to make 𝐽 ≈ 1 when 𝛽𝑗 = 1 in each cell. 𝜆𝐿2 is approximately 1 ×

10−5 ~1 × 10−4. While ensuring a decent drop in the error of QoI, the value of 𝜆𝐿2 is made as
large as possible to reduce the deviation of 𝛽 from its baseline value 1. Some trial and error might

be needed to find a good value for 𝜆𝐿2 . According to our experience, making the regularization term

as large as 10%~20% of the error of QoI after optimization is often enough.

We use the sequential least squares programming (SLSQP) [41] method to solve the optimization

problem in Eq. (7). Since the optimization problem involves functions defined by partial differential

equations (the RANS-predicted QoI data point depends on 𝜷 through the solution of the RANS

equations and the turbulence model equations), we use the discrete adjoint method [42] to compute

𝐽 ’s gradients to 𝜷 . The outline of the discrete adjoint method is briefly described as follows.

Suppose 𝑹 is the residual of the discretized governing equations (the RANS equations and the

turbulence model equations). 𝑹 can be viewed as a vector-valued function having 𝑚 ⋅ 𝑁 outputs

(𝑚 is the number of governing equations, 𝑁 is the number of grid cells), and 𝑹’s inputs are 𝜷

and the flow variables (such as velocity, 𝑘, and 𝜔) in each cell 𝒒:

                                              𝑅(𝒒, 𝜷)                                            (8)

Similarly, 𝐽 can also be viewed as a scalar function of 𝒒 and 𝜷:

                                              𝐽(𝒒, 𝜷)                                            (9)

In a converged CFD simulation, the CFD solver maps a given 𝜷 to its corresponding 𝒒, so the

converged solution of the CFD solver is a function of 𝜷 : 𝒒 = 𝒒(𝜷) . The function is defined

implicitly by the condition that 𝒒 and 𝜷 should fulfill the discretized governing equations:

                                          𝑹(𝒒(𝜷), 𝜷) = 0                                        (10)

Consequently, the gradient of 𝐽 can be expressed as:
                                                     𝜕𝐽 𝜕𝐽
                                   ∇𝜷 𝐽(𝒒(𝜷), 𝜷) =     +   ∇ 𝒒                                  (11)
                                                     𝜕𝜷 𝜕𝒒 𝜷
∇𝜷 𝒒 can be obtained by taking the gradient of Eq. (10):

                                     𝜕𝑹 𝜕𝑹                      𝜕𝑹 −𝟏 𝜕𝑹
                   ∇𝜷 𝑹(𝒒(𝜷), 𝜷) =     +   ∇𝜷 𝒒 = 𝟎 ⇒ ∇𝜷 𝒒 = − ( )                              (12)
                                     𝜕𝜷 𝜕𝒒                      𝜕𝒒    𝜕𝜷
Eq. (11) can then be rewritten as follows:
                                        𝜕𝐽 𝜕𝐽        𝜕𝐽 𝜕𝐽 𝜕𝑹 −𝟏 𝜕𝑹
                      ∇𝜷 𝐽(𝒒(𝜷), 𝜷) =     +   ∇𝜷 𝒒 =   −  ( )                                   (13)
                                        𝜕𝜷 𝜕𝒒        𝜕𝜷 𝜕𝒒 𝜕𝒒    𝜕𝜷
The adjoint vector 𝝍 is defined as the solution of the following linear equation:
                                         𝜕𝑅 𝑇     𝜕𝐽 𝑇
                                        ( ) 𝝍 = −( )                                            (14)
                                         𝜕𝒒       𝜕𝒒
Then, Eq. (13) is equivalent to:
                                                     𝜕𝐽      𝜕𝑹
                                   ∇𝜷 𝐽(𝒒(𝜷), 𝜷) =      + 𝝍𝑇                                    (15)
                                                     𝜕𝜷      𝜕𝜷
Based on the equations above, the discrete adjoint method applied to compute the gradient of 𝐽 to

𝜷 can be summarized as follows:

1. After a converged CFD simulation, we compute the Jacobians 𝜕𝑹/𝜕𝒒, 𝜕𝐽/𝜕𝒒, 𝜕𝑱/𝜕𝜷, and

    𝜕𝑹/𝜕𝜷.

2. We solve linear Eq. (14) to obtain the adjoint vector 𝝍.

3. We compute ∇𝜷 𝐽(𝒒(𝜷), 𝜷) using Eq. (15).

The Jacobians are calculated using automatic differentiation [43][44]. The entire framework for

carrying out FI-CLS and FI-CND is built upon the open-source discrete adjoint solver DAFoam

[45]~[47]. DAFoam uses OpenFOAM’s [48] solver for forward evaluation (i.e., solving the CFD

problem and obtaining the value of 𝐽) by applying the second-order finite volume method.




2.2. Symbolic regression

Field inversion provides us with only the numerical value of the optimized corrective factor 𝛽 field

in a given case. We have to construct a function 𝛽(𝐰) that can map the local flow features 𝐰

(such as the strain rate) to 𝛽 during CFD simulation. In this study, we use the symbolic regression

(SR) algorithm to build a closed-form analytical expression for 𝛽(𝐰) based on the dataset

generated by field inversion. A simple closed-form expression is pursued instead of typical black-

box models such as multilayer perceptron and random forest due to its good efficiency, and

interpretability [29][49]. We use the open-source software PySR written by Cranmer [50] to perform

symbolic regression.

Five local flow features are selected as the input features for symbolic regression. Their definitions

and physical meanings are listed in Table 2. The element functions that constitute the final

expression are listed in Table 3. The basic operators like +, −,×,/ and the functions that often

appear in traditional turbulence models such as tanh(⋅) are selected as element functions. A better

set of element functions might be found but that is beyond the scope of this work. Every expression

produced and evaluated by PySR consists of some element functions in Table 3 and features in Table

2. We choose the weighted mean square error (WMSE) as the loss function to evaluate the
performance of a given expression 𝐸, and the label is 𝛽 − 1:
                                                     𝑀
                                           1
                                  𝑊𝑀𝑆𝐸(𝐸) = ∑ 𝛼𝑖 [(𝛽𝑖 − 1) − 𝑦̂𝑖 ]2                                       (16)
                                           𝑀
                                                    𝑖=1

𝑀 is the total number of samples, 𝛼𝑖 is the weight for the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ sample, and 𝑦̂𝑖 is the predicted

value of the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ sample by expression 𝐸.

During the training process, PySR maintains several populations of expressions and uses the genetic

algorithm described in [50] to evolve the population, generating new expressions for each

population. When the training is complete, PySR outputs the expression with the smallest WMSE

at each complexity level 𝐶 ≤ 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥 . 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑥 is set to 16 in this study, and 𝐶 is calculated by:

                                    𝐶(𝐸) = 𝑁𝑜𝑝𝑟 + 2𝑁𝑣𝑎𝑟 + 4𝑁𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡.                                        (17)

𝑁𝑜𝑝𝑟 , 𝑁𝑣𝑎𝑟 , and 𝑁𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡 are the number of operators, the number of variables, and the number of

constants in a given expression 𝐸, respectively. The weights of the variable and the constant are

increased to encourage PySR to generate simpler expressions while keeping the number of constants

and variables as small as possible.

                Table 2. The local flow features chosen to construct the expression for 𝛽(𝐰).

  Name         Definition                                     Physical meanings

    𝝀𝟏               ̂2 )
                  tr(𝑺             The 1st, 2nd, and 5th scaler invariances of nondimensional strain rate ̂
                                                                                                          𝑺=
                                        ∗                                          ̂        ∗
                                   𝑺/(𝛽 𝜔) and nondimensional rotation rate 𝛀 = 𝛀/(𝛽 𝜔) derived by
    𝝀𝟐               ̂ 2)
                  tr(𝛀             Pope [51] for the general tensor representation of the Reynolds stress. 𝛽∗

                  ̂2 ⋅ ̂           is a model constant of the SST model and equals 0.09. The 3rd and the 4th
    𝝀𝟓         tr(𝛀    𝑺2 )
                                   invariances are omitted because they are zero in 2D flows and our training
                                   set is 2D. Intuitively, 𝜆1 , 𝜆2 , and 𝜆5 measure the ratio of the mean
                                   strain/rotation frequency and the turbulence dissipation frequency (𝜔).

   𝐑𝐞𝛀          |𝛀|𝑑 2 /𝜈          A feature proposed by [52] and [16] to identify strong shear away from the
                                   wall.

   𝑷𝒌 /𝝐     𝜏𝑖𝑗𝑅 𝑢𝑖,𝑗 /(𝛽∗ 𝑘𝜔)    The ratio between the production and the dissipation of turbulent kinetic
                                            𝑅
                                   energy. 𝜏𝑖,𝑗 is the Reynolds stress tensor calculated using the Boussinesq
                                   hypothesis. [39][52] proposed empirically that the traditional turbulence
                                   models underestimate eddy viscosity when 𝑃𝑘 /𝜖 is large.

    𝜼           𝜆2 𝜆5 /ReΩ         The feature extracted by symbolic regression from the field inversion
                                   dataset of the CBFS case in a previous work [29]. The physical
                                   interpretation of this term is a bit complicated and can be found in [29].

                                     Table 3. The list of element functions

  Operator Type                                              Operators
      Unary                                                              1     1
                                                exp(⋅) , tanh(⋅) ,           ,
                                                                      1 + (⋅) (⋅)
      Binary                                                       (⋅)
                                (⋅) + (⋅), (⋅) − (⋅), (⋅) × (⋅),       , min(⋅,⋅) , max(⋅,⋅) , (⋅)(⋅)
                                                                   (⋅)




3. Field inversion and model training on the NASA hump
     case and the CBFS case

In this section, we apply both the classic field inversion (FI-CLS) and the conditioned field inversion

(FI-CND) methods to the NASA hump [53], which features a relatively high Reynolds number

(~106), and the curved-backward-facing step (CBFS) [54], which features a low Reynolds number

(~104), using large eddy simulation (LES) data from [53][54] as our high-fidelity reference. We

develop two unique datasets by applying the FI-CLS and FI-CND methods to data from both the

NASA hump and CBFS cases. By combining data from these cases, we incorporate a range of

physics from high to low Reynolds numbers, enriching the dataset with diverse aerodynamic

behaviors. This diversity may boost the generalizability of models trained on these datasets.

Subsequently, we employ symbolic regression on each dataset to create two predictive models: the

SR-CLS model from the FI-CLS dataset and the SR-CND model from the FI-CND dataset, aiming

for enhanced accuracy in aerodynamic predictions. This integration demonstrates the effectiveness

of our training approach in improving model accuracy.


3.1. Field inversion

3.1.1. CBFS


The geometry and boundary conditions of the CBFS case are shown in Figure 3. The Reynolds

number based on the step height ℎ = 1 m is Reℎ = 13700. The velocity at the center of the inlet

is set to 1 m/s. The objective function is shown in Eq. (18), with the LES 𝑥-velocity [54] being

the high-fidelity data.
                                    30
                                                        2                         2
                         𝐽 = 𝜆𝑄𝑜𝐼 ∑[𝑢𝑖𝐿𝐸𝑆 − 𝑢𝑖 (𝜷)] + 𝜆𝐿2 ∑(𝛽𝑗 − 1)                            (18)
                                    𝑖=1                            𝑗

The first summation is taken over the 30 randomly placed points in the blue-shaded region in Figure

3 (where the separation resides), denoted by blue triangles. 𝑢𝑖𝐿𝐸𝑆 is the LES 𝑥-velocity at the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ

extraction point, and 𝑢𝑖 (𝜷) is its RANS counterpart. The second summation is taken over all the

cells. The FI-CLS and the FI-CND share the same objective function (Eq. (18)). The initial design

of the 𝛽 field is set to 1 uniformly. The convergence history of the optimization is shown in Figure

4. FI-CND decreases the objective function by 74.7%, while FI-CLS decreases it by 88.3%.




                    Figure 3. The geometry and boundary conditions of the CBFS case




                         Figure 4. Convergence history of the objective function.

The streamline plot in Figure 5 demonstrates that both the FI-CLS and FI-CND approaches align

the separation zone more accurately with the LES data than does the baseline SST model, which

significantly overestimates the size of this zone. Furthermore, the velocity profiles in Figure 6

indicate that the 𝑥-velocity from both optimized 𝛽 fields is more consistent with the LES data,

with FI-CLS showing a slightly closer match in accuracy.




                              (a)                                           (b)
                                (c)                                             (d)

          Figure 5. Streamline plot of the separation zone. (a) SST; (b) LES; (c) FI-CLS; (d) FI-CND




                            Figure 6. Velocity profiles at different 𝑥-standpoints.

The optimized 𝛽 fields generated by FI-CLS and FI-CND are shown in Figure 7. FI-CLS increases

𝛽 in both the separated shear layer and the attached boundary layer preceding the step, while FI-

CND only increases 𝛽 in the separated shear layer. This demonstrates the ability of the conditioned

field inversion method to protect the attached boundary layer.




                                 (a)                                             (b)

                      Figure 7. 𝛽 distributions obtained by (a) FI-CLS and (b) FI-CND



3.1.2. NASA hump


The geometry and boundary conditions of the NASA hump case are shown in Figure 8. The

Reynolds number based on the hump’s chord length 𝑐 = 1 m is Re𝑐 = 0.936 × 106. The inlet

velocity is set to 14.88 m/s. The FI-CLS and the FI-CND share the same objective function shown

in Eq.(18). The first summation is taken over 40 points marked by triangles in the blue-shaded region
of Figure 8 to measure the difference between the 𝑥-velocity predicted by RANS and the LES data

[53].




                    Figure 8. The geometry and boundary conditions of the NASA hump

We start with a uniform initial distribution of 𝛽 set to 1. Figure 9 illustrates the convergence history

of the objective function for both FI-CLS and FI-CND. Both methods achieve convergence after

approximately 140 SLSQP iterations. In terms of performance, the objective function shows a 66.7%

reduction in FI-CND compared to a 61.7% reduction in FI-CLS. We observe a notable suppression

of the separation zone for both FI-CND and FI-CLS compared to the baseline SST model after field

inversion, aligning more closely with the LES data. This is demonstrated in Figure 10. Furthermore,

a detailed comparison of the velocity field in Figure 11 reveals that the 𝑥 -velocity from the

optimized 𝛽 fields better matches the LES data, indicating an improvement in model accuracy.




                       Figure 9. The convergence history of the field inversion process




                                (a)                                           (b)
                                  (c)                                           (d)

 Figure 10. Streamline plot of the separation zone. (a) LES data, (b) baseline SST model, (c) FI-CLS, (d) FI-CND




                         Figure 11. Velocity profiles at different downstream locations.

Figure 12 displays the optimized 𝛽 fields produced by both FI-CLS and FI-CND. In the FI-CLS

approach, 𝛽 increases to approximately 2 near the separated shear layer. Notably, there is also an

increase in 𝛽 within the attached boundary layer at the top of the hump. This increase in 𝛽 in the

attached boundary layer could disrupt the calibration of the baseline SST model, leading to

inaccuracies. On the other hand, the FI-CND method effectively safeguards the attached boundary

layer, allowing 𝛽 to increase only around the separated shear layer, reaching values between 4 and

5. This outcome illustrates the efficacy of our conditioned field inversion technique in maintaining

a 𝛽 value of 1 in the attached boundary layer, thereby preserving the integrity of the baseline SST

model's calibration while addressing areas of high uncertainty.




                                  (a)                                            (b)
                                 (c)                                            (d)

  Figure 12. 𝛽 field obtained by field inversion. (a) FI-CLS, around the top of the hump; (b) FI-CLS, near the

   separated shear layer; (c) FI-CND, around the top of the hump; (d) FI-CND, near the separated shear layer



3.2. Symbolic model training

By mixing the field inversion results of the NASA hump case and the CBFS case, we obtain two

datasets, including the local flow features described in Table 3 and the optimized corrective factor

𝛽. Note that a tuple of the local features and the corrective factor (𝐰, 𝛽) is treated as one sample;

therefore, the total number of samples equals the number of cells used in CFD analysis. One dataset

is produced by FI-CLS, and the other is produced by FI-CND. We then downsample each mixed

dataset to balance the proportion of trivial samples (where |𝛽 − 1| < 0.05) and nontrivial samples

(where |𝛽 − 1| ≥ 0.05), as shown in Figure 13. Each dataset contains approximately 3000 samples

after downsampling. This downsampling is crucial for training efficiency, as larger datasets with

approximately 10,000 samples can drastically slow the training with PySR, sometimes requiring

dozens of hours. 𝛾 in Figure 13 is the ratio between the trivial and the non-trivial samples in the

original mixed dataset. That is, if we denote the number of non-trivial samples as 𝑁 , then the

number of trivial samples is:

                                               𝑁𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑎𝑙 = 𝛾𝑁                                               (19)

The weight in the loss function (Eq. (16)) is thus set based on the ratio 𝛾:
                                                    1, 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝑛
                                              𝛼𝑖 = {                                                       (20)
                                                     𝛾, 𝑖 ∈ 𝑆𝑡

𝑆𝑛 is the index set of the nontrivial samples, and 𝑆𝑡 is the index set of the trivial samples. The

weight in Eq. (20) can offset the bias caused by the change in sample distribution after

downsampling. Yan et al. [21] showed that the downsampling and weight adjustment procedure has

little impact on the accuracy of the model built by the FIML framework.
                                    Figure 13. Dataset downsampling.

For the training on each dataset, the total number of populations is set to 20, and the number of

expressions in each population is set to 80. The training lasts for 1000 iterations. After training on

each dataset, we select the most accurate expression as our final choice. The chosen expressions are

shown in Table 4. According to the definition of features in Table 2, the expressions suggest that 𝛽

will be increased where the non-dimensional rotation rate or strain rate is large (which often happens

in the separated shear flows). An increase in 𝛽 would result in a decrease in 𝜔, and thus increasing

eddy viscosity. The increased eddy viscosity will promote the momentum diffusion from the

mainstream to the low-speed recirculation region, thus correcting the size of the separation. The

physical implication of the correction term is consistent with the empirical findings in [39] and [40],

which argue that the error of the traditional turbulence models mainly comes from the

underestimated eddy viscosity in the separated shear flows far from the wall layer. Because the focus

of the expression is outside of the wall layer (in the separated shear flow), it is still effective even

with the filter function 𝑓𝑑 prevents the correction near the wall. The expression produced by FI-

CLS is then integrated into Eq. (2), and the expression of FI-CND is integrated into Eq. (5). We call

the two resultant models SR-CLS and SR-CND, respectively. Figure 14 shows the 𝛽 values

predicted by SR-CLS and SR-CND using the features obtained by field inversion (without CFD

iteration), indicating the effectiveness of symbolic regression in approximating the 𝛽 produced by

field inversion. In this study, we found that the SR-CLS and the SR-CND model increase the total

runtime (of the same CFD iteration steps) by about 15% and 10% respectively, which is acceptable.

On the contrary, a study by Yin et al. [8] showed that if a random forest model is called in every

iteration of CFD, the computational time required to converge the solution is about 30 times the

convergence time of the baseline model. Consequently, the symbolic model is indeed more efficient.

                           Table 4. The final expressions trained on each dataset

        Training dataset                                          Expression
                                                                3
         FI-CLS dataset                            𝛽−1=−          𝜆 tanh(−0.092𝜆2 )
                                                               500 5
        FI-CND dataset                              𝛽 − 1 = min(0.00435𝜆22 , 3.806)




                                                   (a)




                                                   (b)

 Figure 14. 𝛽 profiles predicted by the SR-CLS and SR-CND methods for (a) the NASA hump case and (b) the

                                               CBFS case



3.3. Application of the models on the training set

The SR-CLS and the SR-CND models are applied to the CBFS case and the NASA hump case to

test the effectiveness of our training and the ability of the models to couple with CFD. The SR-CLS

and the SR-CND models are called in every CFD iteration to update the 𝛽 field. Note that in this

section and going forward, for the SR-CND model, we plot the distribution of (𝛽 − 1)𝑓𝑑 + 1

instead of 𝛽 since the flow field is directly influenced by the former. All calculations are performed

using OpenFOAM’s SimpleFOAM solver [48].
3.3.1. CBFS


Figure 15 features streamlines predicted by the SR-CLS and SR-CND models, showing an

improvement over the reattachment point at 𝑥 = 6.0, as given by the SST model. The velocity

profiles in Figure 16 reveal that both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models align more closely with the

LES data, although they slightly deviate from the field inversion results. This deviation could stem

from the combined CBFS and NASA hump data used in training and the limited fitting capacity of

the symbolic regression algorithm. The 𝐶𝑓 distribution, presented in Figure 17, indicates that the

SR-CLS, SR-CND, and SST models yield similar results in the attached boundary layer and on the

curved step. The key distinction is observed in the reattachment region, where the SST model tends

to underpredict 𝐶𝑓 . In contrast, both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models demonstrate improved

accuracy in this area. Figure 18 shows that both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models exhibit increased

𝛽 values in the separated shear layer.




                              (a)                                              (b)

                    Figure 15. Streamline plot of the SR-CLS and the SR-CND models.




                          Figure 16. Velocity profiles at different 𝑥 standpoints
                       Figure 17. 𝐶𝑓 distribution on the curved step and downstream




                               (a)                                         (b)

            Figure 18. 𝛽 distributions given by (a) the SR-CLS model and (b) the SR-CND model

In summary, both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models outperform the baseline SST model,

particularly in predicting the reattachment location, demonstrating the effectiveness of the training.


3.3.2. NASA hump


The streamline visualization in Figure 19 demonstrates that both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models

more accurately predict the reattachment point in the separation zone than does the baseline SST

model. The 𝑥-velocity profiles shown in Figure 20 further confirm the significant improvements

achieved by both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models. The skin friction coefficient (𝐶𝑓 ) distributions

on and downstream of the hump (𝑥 ∈ [0.0,1.0] and (1.0, +∞) , respectively) are illustrated in

Figure 21(a). Here, the SR-CLS and SR-CND closely match the experimental 𝐶𝑓 data [55]

(measured at the same Reynolds number as the LES data used for field inversion) in the downstream

separation zone, a region where the baseline SST model shows considerable deviation. However,

while the predictions of the SR-CND model are similar to those of the SST model on top of the

hump, the SR-CLS model slightly overestimates the 𝐶𝑓 value there. Figure 21(b) provides a detailed

comparison of the 𝐶𝑓 error (relative to the experimental data) for each part. The mean squared

errors (MSEs) of SR-CLS and SR-CND in the separation zone are approximately 6.7% of those of
the SST model. At the top of the hump, the MSEs of the SR-CND and SST models are roughly

equivalent, whereas the MSE of the SR-CLS model is 160% that of the SST model, indicating a

greater deviation.




                                (a)                                              (b)

             Figure 19. Streamlines in the separation zone given by (a) SR-CLS and (b) SR-CND




                Figure 20. The velocity profiles at different downstream locations of the hump




                              (a)                                                        (b)

                 Figure 21. (a) 𝐶𝑓 distribution given by [55] (b) Relative error in each region

The 𝛽 distribution in Figure 22 shows that both the SR-CLS and the SR-CND models increase 𝛽

in the separated shear layer. Similar to its training data produced by FI-CLS, SR-CLS gives an

increase in 𝛽 near the top of the hump. The increase in 𝛽 is responsible for the increased MSE of

𝐶𝑓 on the top of the hump, as shown in Figure 21(b).
                                  (a)                                            (b)




                                  (c)                                            (d)

Figure 22. 𝛽 distributions: (a) and (b) are obtained via SR-CLS, and (c) and (d) are obtained via SR-CND. (a) and

                  (c) are on the top of the hump, while (b) and (d) are downstream of the hump.

In summary, the SR-CLS and the SR-CND models can improve the baseline SST model

performance in terms of separated flow to a similar level, but the SR-CLS model degrades the

baseline SST model accuracy in the attached boundary layer, while the SR-CND model preserves

it. This is different from the CBFS case, where the SR-CLS model and the SR-CND model provide

similar results in the attached boundary layer. This difference might be caused by the different

Reynolds numbers in the two cases.



4. Differences between test cases and the training set

This section evaluates the SR-CLS and SR-CND models across various unseen scenarios. Both

models exhibit superior performance in predicting separation flow compared to the baseline SST

model in most cases tested, showing similar and relatively good L3 generalizability. However, only

the SR-CND model developed by conditioned field inversion maintains the accuracy of the SST

model in the attached boundary layer (e.g., the ZPG flat plate, NACA0012 at zero angle of attack),

demonstrating effective L2 generalizability.
4.1. Periodic hills

In this section, we apply the SR-CLS and SR-CND models to classic periodic hills. The geometry

construction and DNS analysis were carried out by Xiao et al. [56]. 𝛼 is a parameter that controls

the aspect ratio of the periodic hills, as shown in Figure 23. The Reynolds number based on the hill

height is 5600. 3 levels of grids are applied to test the grid convergence property. The height of the

first grid layer near the wall ensures Δ𝑦 + < 1. All computations are carried out using OpenFOAM’s

SimpleFOAM solver. The friction coefficients defined by Eq.(21) (𝑈𝑏 is the bulk velocity, 𝐿 is the

streamwise length of the geometry, and the integration is taken on both the upper surface and the

lower surface) on different levels of grids are plotted in Figure 24. The 𝐶𝐹 difference between 3

levels of mesh are all smaller than 1 × 10−4, with the difference between the medium mesh and

the fine mesh around 5 × 10−5. Consequently, the grid convergence property is satisfying.

                                                   1
                                         𝐶𝐹 =           ∫ 𝐶𝑓 𝑑𝑥                                 (21)
                                                1 2
                                                  𝜌𝑈𝑏 𝐿
                                                2

The velocity profiles given by different models are shown in Figure 25. The velocity profiles given

by the same model on different grid levels almost overlap, showing good grid convergence

properties. The SR-CND and the SR-CLS models both improve the baseline SST model’s result in

each case, with the SR-CND model giving a relatively better result in the 𝛼 = 1.0 case. Figure 26

suggests that both the SR-CND and the SR-CLS models also bring some enhancement to the

accuracy of 𝐶𝑓 prediction.




                               Figure 23. The geometry of the periodic hills
Figure 24. Friction coefficients obtained by different models on 3 levels of meshes, 𝛼 = 1.0.




                                             (a)




                                             (b)




                                             (c)
 Figure 25. Velocity profiles of the (a) 𝛼 = 0.5 case, (b) 𝛼 = 0.8 case, and (c) 𝛼 = 1.0 case. The dash-dot line

  represents the coarse mesh, the dashed line represents the medium mesh, and the solid line represents the fine

                                                      mesh.




 Figure 26. The friction coefficient distribution of 𝛼 = 0.8, fine mesh along the lower surface given by different

                                                     models

For simplicity, we only show the streamline and 𝛽 distribution of the 𝛼 = 0.8 case on fine mesh

here in Figure 27. The other cases are similar. The SST model predicts that the flow will attach to

the next hill. On the other hand, the reattachment point given by the SR-CND and the SR-CLS

models is approximately 𝑥 = 6.0, which is much closer to the DNS result (𝑥 ≈ 5.2) than the SST

model. The 𝛽 given by the SR-CND model concentrates near the separated shear layer, while the

𝛽 distribution of the SR-CLS model is more diffusive. The SR-CLS activates 𝛽 near the upper

surface, where the flow remains attached and might not need any correction.




                         (a)                                                      (b)




                         (c)                                                      (d)

   Figure 27. Streamline plot of (a) DNS, (b) SST, (c) SR-CLS, with 𝛽 contour, (d) SR-CND, with 𝛽 contour

In summary, the SR-CND model and the SR-CLS model have similar abilities to predict separated
flow in a series of periodic hill cases. Both of the models substantially outperform the baseline SST

model.


4.2. The NLR-7301 two-element airfoil

The prediction of aerodynamic performance, particularly stall behavior, in multiple-element airfoils

is crucial for designing high-lift configurations. The SST model often inaccurately predicts a large

separation zone near the wake [57], which is a key issue in stall behavior resolution. In this section,

we assess whether the SR-CLS and SR-CND models can enhance stall prediction compared to the

baseline SST model using the NLR-7301 two-element airfoil [59][60] as a test case. Figure 28

illustrates the geometry of the NLR-7301 airfoil and its C-type mesh. The setup involves a Reynolds

number of 2.51 × 106 based on the chord length and a freestream Mach number of 0.185. The

height of the first grid layer is adjusted to ensure that Δ𝑦 + remains below 1. Given the potential

for the Mach number near the airfoil's leading edge to reach 0.6 at high angles of attack, we employ

the compressible flow solver CFL3D [58] for this analysis.




                        Figure 28. The computational mesh of the NLR-7301 airfoil.

Figure 29(a) displays the lift coefficient versus the angle of attack (𝐶𝐿 − 𝐴𝑂𝐴) curves generated by

various models alongside experimental data [60]. As shown in Table 5, both the SR-CLS and SR-

CND models produce results more aligned with the experimental values, with the SR-CND model

achieving a maximum lift coefficient (𝐶𝐿,𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) error of just 1%. In comparison, the SR-CLS model

exhibits a larger relative error in 𝐶𝐿,𝑚𝑎𝑥 , and the baseline SST model underestimates both 𝐶𝐿,𝑚𝑎𝑥

and the stall angle of attack ( 𝐴𝑂𝐴𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑙 ). Figure 29(b) presents the pressure coefficient ( 𝐶𝑝 )

distribution at 𝐴𝑂𝐴 = 13.1∘. Here, the SST model predicts a lower 𝐶𝑝 on the suction surface than

do the other models. While both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models correlate well with the
experimental data, the SR-CLS model shows a slightly more pronounced underestimation of the

suction peak. Figure 29(c) shows the 𝐶𝑓 distribution at 𝐴𝑂𝐴 = 13.1∘ . The data on the flap is

shifted by 0.1 downstream for clarity. The result obtained by the SST model shows a clear separation

near the trailing edge while the SR-CLS and the SR-CND model predict no separation. The

comparison with the experiment is rather qualitative here because the experiment 𝐶𝑓 data is very

sparse. In Figure 30, the Mach number contours and streamlines are illustrated. The baseline SST

model predicts a significant separation zone starting from the rear part of the main wing. Conversely,

the SR-CLS and SR-CND models show no such flow separation.




                           (a)                                                          (b)




                                                     (c)

  Figure 29. The aerodynamic performance of NLR-7301 given by the SST, SR-CLS, and SR-CND models: (a)

         𝐶𝐿 − 𝐴𝑂𝐴 curve, (b) 𝐶𝑝 distribution at 𝐴𝑂𝐴 = 13.1∘, (c) 𝐶𝑓 distribution at 𝐴𝑂𝐴 = 13.1∘

                         Table 5. The results and relative errors of different models

                                   Experiment [60]                 SST           SR-CLS       SR-CND

      𝑪𝑳,𝒎𝒂𝒙/relative error              3.03/--               2.84/6.3%          2.94/3%     3.00/1%

      Stall 𝑨𝑶𝑨/deviation               14.1∘ /--               11.1∘ /3∘        13.1∘ /1∘    13.1∘ /1∘
                   (a)                               (b)                                  (c)

 Figure 30. The Mach number contour and the streamlines at 𝐴𝑂𝐴 = 13.1∘ given by (a) the SST model, (b) the

                                SR-CLS model, and (c) the SR-CND model.

Figure 31 indicates that for both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models, 𝛽 increases in two key mixing

regions, as identified in Figure 32. The first mixing region is where the free-shear layer, originating

from the leading edge of the main wing at high 𝐴𝑂𝐴, meets the wake. The second mixing region is

created by the interaction of the flap's wake with the jet from the slot. We analyze the physical

mechanisms behind the suppressed separation observed in Figure 30 for both models. In these

mixing regions, 𝛽 is elevated due to strong shear forces, leading to increased |𝜆2 | and |𝜆5 |

values, as indicated in Table 2 and Table 4. This increase in 𝛽 amplifies the destruction of 𝜔 in

these regions, resulting in reduced dissipation of 𝑘 and, consequently, a higher turbulent viscosity

(𝜈𝑇 ). This enhanced 𝜈𝑇 , compared to that predicted by the baseline SST model, facilitates more

effective momentum diffusion from the mainstream to the shear layer. As a result, the shear layers

modeled by SR-CLS and SR-CND possess greater momentum, making them less prone to flow

separation than those predicted by the baseline SST model.




                                (a)                                         (b)

    Figure 31. 𝛽 distribution at 𝐴𝑂𝐴 = 13.1∘ given by (a) the SR-CLS model and (b) the SR-CND model
                                 (a)                                          (b)

 Figure 32. The structure of the flow field near the flap at 𝐴𝑂𝐴 = 13.1∘ given by (a) the SR-CLS model and (b)

                                             the SR-CND model

In summary, both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models outperform the baseline SST model in

predicting stall behavior for the NLR-7301 airfoil, a scenario distinct from their training set,

demonstrating good L3 generalizability in this test case. Notably, the SR-CND model achieves an

impressively low relative error of just 1% in 𝐶𝐿,𝑚𝑎𝑥 compared to the experimental data.

Furthermore, these models maintain stability and effectiveness when integrated with the

compressible CFD code CFL3D, highlighting their strong portability and applicability in various

aerodynamic analyses.


4.3. SAE notchback standard model

In this part, we apply the SR-CLS and the SR-CND model to a simplified notchback car model to

test their ability to generalize to 3-D complex separated flow. The geometric model used here is

often referred to as the SAE model [62]. The experimental data used in this part were obtained from

[62]. The computational domain is shown in Figure 33(a), which resembles the experimental

environment in [62]. 𝐿 in Figure 33(a) refers to the length of the SAE model. The inlet velocity is

40 𝑚/𝑠, and the Reynolds number based on the model length is 2.3 × 106; both of these settings

agree with the experiment. We use an unstructured mesh for this case. The grid convergence

property is studied in this case. A coarse mesh with about 1 × 107 cells, a medium-mesh with

about 1.8 × 107 cells, and a fine mesh with about 3.3 × 107 cells are constructed. All meshes are

built upon the half model. The grid point distributions for the coarse mesh on the symmetry plane

and the SAE body are shown in Figure 33(b) and (c). More cells are added to the notchback to

capture the potential tiny separation there. Computations are performed using OpenFOAM’s
SimpleFOAM solver. Figure 34 shows that for the SR-CND model and the SR-CLS model, the drag

coefficients calculated on the fine and the medium are essentially the same (<0.001). For the SST

model, the drag difference between the fine mesh and the medium mesh is slightly larger (~0.001)

but is also substantially smaller than the drag difference between the coarse mesh and the medium

mesh (~0.005). Consequently, the grid convergence is satisfactory. In the subsequent discussion of

this section, we plot the result of the medium mesh.




                            (a)                                                 (b)




                                                      (c)

 Figure 33. (a) The computational domain; (b) the grid in the symmetry plane; (c) the surface mesh of the model




                        Figure 34. The grid convergence properties of different models.

The streamlines at the rear are shown in Figure 35. The separation zones obtained by the SR-CLS,

SR-CND, and PIV experiments all ended at approximately 𝑥 = 0.60 𝑚. On the other hand, the SST
model overpredicts the recirculation, giving a separation zone ending at 𝑥 ≈ 0.63 𝑚. The velocity

profiles shown in Figure 36 also indicate that the SR-CLS and SR-CND models outperform the

baseline SST model and align better with the PIV data. The velocity profiles obtained on the coarse

mesh, the medium mesh, and the fine mesh have relatively small differences, indicating good grid

convergence. Figure 37 shows that both the SR-CLS and the SR-CND models increase 𝛽 in the

separated shear layers, thus suppressing the separation size. Table 6 suggests that both the SR-CLS

and the SR-CND models substantially decrease the error in the predicted drag coefficient.




                                 (a)                                              (b)




                               (c)                                                (d)

Figure 35. Separation bubble at the rear of the car obtained by (a) PIV[62], (b) SST, (c) SR-CLS, and (d) SR-CND.

                                     The results on the medium mesh are shown.
  Figure 36. The velocity profiles near the end of the separation zone at the rear obtained on different grids. The

dashed line indicates the coarse mesh, the dash-dot line indicates the medium mesh and the solid line indicates the

                                                     fine mesh.




                              (a)                                                 (b)

Figure 37. 𝛽 distribution in the wake obtained by (a) SR-CLS and (b) SR-CND. The results on the medium mesh

                                                    are shown.

                   Table 6. Drag coefficients (𝐶𝐷 ) obtained by different models (medium mesh)


                         SST                    SR-CND                  SR-CLS                 Experiment


         𝐶𝐷              0.181                  0.211                   0.209                  0.207

  Relative error         12.6%                  1.9%                    1.0%                   --



Figure 38 illustrates the 𝛽 distribution near the end of the notchback. Here, the SR-CLS model

shows an increase in 𝛽 close to the wall, whereas the 𝛽 value in the SR-CND model remains at

1.0 near the wall, a result of incorporating the 𝑓𝑑 function. In Figure 39, the separation region

(marked by the 𝑢𝑥 = −0.001 𝑚/𝑠 contour) reveals that both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models

reduce the thin separation zone at the notchback end. The SR-CLS model is more effective at
suppressing this separation due to its increased 𝛽 near the wall. However, as shown in Figure 40,

this increased 𝛽 near the wall in the SR-CLS model leads to significant deviations in the pressure

coefficient (𝐶𝑝 ) distribution on the upper surface of the SAE model, particularly near the notchback

end, diverging notably from both the SST model and experimental data. This deviation is caused by

the reduced thin separation predicted by the SR-CLS model. In contrast, the SR-CND model also

introduces some errors in 𝐶𝑝 , these errors are relatively minor compared to those of the SR-CLS

model. This more accurate performance of the SR-CND model is attributed to its mechanism for

protecting the near-wall region.




                            (a)                                              (b)

  Figure 38. 𝛽 distribution at the end of the notchback given by the (a) SR-CLS and (b) SR-CND methods. The

                                   results on the medium mesh are shown.




                (a)                                  (b)                              (c)

 Figure 39. Contours of 𝑢𝑥 = −0.001 𝑚/𝑠 given by (a) SST, (b) SR-CLS, and (c) SR-CND. The results on the

                                          medium mesh are shown.
 Figure 40. 𝐶𝑝 distribution on the upper surface given by different models and the experiment. The results on the

                                            medium mesh are shown.

In summary, the SR-CLS and the SR-CND models can both improve the accuracy of the baseline

SST model for 3-D separated flows around the SAE, showing good generalizability to L3. However,

the negative impact of the SR-CND model on the region where the baseline model already performs

well, i.e., the end of the notchback, is smaller than that of the SR-CLS model.


4.4. Ahmed body standard model

In this section, we use the SR-CLS model and the SR-CND model to compute the 3-D separated

flow around an Ahmed body with a slant angle of 25.0 degrees [63]. In contrast to the SAE model

in the previous section, which resembles a sedan, the geometry of the Ahmed body’s rear is more

similar to that of a sport utility vehicle (SUV) or a hatchback vehicle. The half model shown in

Figure 41(a) is analyzed in this study. The Reynolds number based on the body length is 2.78 × 106,

and the inlet velocity is 40 𝑚/𝑠. Different from the previous 3D case, we use structured mesh here,

as shown in Figure 41(b). Three meshes are used to test the grid convergence property. The coarsest

mesh has approximately 3.6 × 106 cells, the medium mesh has around 7.2 × 106 cells and the

fine mesh has about 1.4 × 107 cells. The CFD analysis in this section is conducted using

OpenFOAM’s SimpleFOAM solver.
                     (a)                                                        (b)

   Figure 41. The configuration of the Ahmed body case. (a) The half model and the symmetry plane. (b) The

                                         medium computational mesh




               Figure 42. The drag coefficients obtained by different models on 3 levels of mesh

For the SR-CND and the SR-CLS model, the difference in drag coefficient between the coarse mesh

and the medium mesh is about 0.005, and the difference between the medium mesh and the fine

mesh is 0.001~0.002, demonstrating good grid convergence properties. The drag coefficient

fluctuates as the mesh becomes denser for the SST model. Figure 43 shows that the SR-CND model

and the SR-CLS model give more accurate predictions for the velocity profiles than the baseline

SST model when compared to the PIV data [64]. The velocity profiles given by the same model on

different grids essentially overlap, showing good grid convergence properties. The mean square

error between the predicted velocity (normalized by the freestream velocity 𝑈∞ = 40 𝑚/𝑠) and the

PIV data [64] is shown in Table 7. Both the SR-CND and the SR-CLS models reduce the MSE by

approximately 90%. Figure 44 (a) and (b) show that the SR-CND and SR-CLS models increase 𝛽

near the separated shear layers originating from the upper surface and the lower surface. The pattern

of 𝛽’s distribution is similar to that of the SAE case. As shown in Figure 44 (c) and (d), the SR-

CND model and the SR-CLS model both increase 𝛽 slightly near the slant, but only the SR-CLS

model activates 𝛽 immediately near the wall. The 3-D streamline plots in Figure 45 show similar

separation patterns given by the SR-CLS and the SR-CND models, where the flow remains attached
all along the slant, agreeing with the experiment [64]. However, the separation structure given by

the SST model is completely different, with a large separation starting from the beginning of the

slant.




    Figure 43. Velocity profiles given by different turbulence models on different grid levels. The dashed line

  represents the coarse mesh, the dash-dot line represents the medium mesh, and the solid line represents the fine

                                                       mesh.

   Table 7. The MSEs of the velocity profiles given by different turbulence models calculated on the fine mesh


                                                   SST                SR-CND                 SR-CLS

         Velocity profile’s RMSE                  0.677                 0.072                 0.069

         Relative to baseline (SST)              100.0%                 10.6%                 10.2%




                                (a)                                                  (b)
                                (c)                                               (d)

 Figure 44. 𝛽 distributions (a) given by the SST-CLS model in the wake, (b) given by the SR-CND model in the

  wake, (c) given by the SST-CLS model near the slant, and (d) given by the SR-CND model near the slant. The

                                      results on the fine mesh are shown.




                (a)                                   (b)                                (c)

 Figure 45. Streamlines in the separation zone given by (a) SR-CLS, (b) SR-CND, and (c) SST. The streamlines

 given by the SR-CLS and the SR-CND model are colored based on 𝛽. The results on the fine mesh are shown.

In conclusion, the SR-CLS and the SR-CND models successfully generalize to this 3-D SUV-like

case, outperforming the baseline SST model in terms of separation prediction.


4.5. Attached boundary layer tests

Our primary goal in introducing conditioned field inversion was to maintain the original calibration

of the model in wall-attached flows. Earlier tests have shown that the SR-CND model performs

comparably to the SR-CLS model in separated flows, demonstrating similar L3 generalizability.

Notably, the SR-CND model does not enable the corrective factor 𝛽 near the wall in these cases.

To assess whether our initial objective is achieved, we directly evaluate both the SR-CLS and SR-

CND models on attached boundary layers. This evaluation includes tests on both the zero-pressure-

gradient (ZPG) flat plate boundary layer and the pressure-gradient boundary layer on the
NACA0012 airfoil using the SimpleFOAM solver in OpenFOAM.

We first introduce the test on the zero-pressure-gradient boundary layer. The computational domain

and the boundary conditions are shown in Figure 46. The Reynolds number based on the flat plate

length is Re𝐿 = 1.0 × 107. A grid containing approximately 2 × 105 rectangular cells are used.

The height of the first grid layer ensures that Δ𝑦 + ≤ 0.05. Figure 47(a) shows that the friction

coefficients given by the baseline SST model and the SR-CND model agree well with the

experimental results [66], while the SR-CLS model overestimates the skin friction. Figure 47(b)

demonstrates that the baseline SST model and the SR-CND model capture the viscous layer and the

log layer with good accuracy, but the SR-CLS model yields an erroneous log layer. Figure 47(b)

also suggests that the boundary layer thickness is overpredicted by the SR-CLS model compared

with the SST result.

Figure 48 shows the 𝛽 distributions given by the SR-CLS model and the SR-CND model at 𝑥 =

0.3. The SR-CND gives a uniform 𝛽 distribution of 1, while the SR-CLS model increases 𝛽 to

approximately 1.06. Although the increase in 𝛽 is relatively small, the error caused by it in the

boundary layer in terms of the friction and velocity profile is not negligible.

In conclusion, the model generated by the classic field inversion method (the SR-CLS model) indeed

breaks the calibration by increasing 𝛽 in the near-wall region and therefore puts the accuracy of

the ZPG boundary layer at risk. On the other hand, the model generated by the proposed method,

namely, the SR-CND model, can maintain 𝛽 = 1 in the ZPG boundary layer, thus preserving the

calibration and accuracy of the baseline SST model.




                         Figure 46. The computational domain of the ZPG flat plate
                          (a)                                                      (b)

        Figure 47. (a) Friction coefficient 𝐶𝑓 distribution and (b) velocity profiles at 𝑅𝑒𝑥 = 0.5 × 107




                Figure 48. 𝛽 distribution along the wall-normal direction at 𝑅𝑒𝑥 = 1.5 × 106

Now, we introduce the test on the NACA0012 airfoil at a zero angle of attack, in which the baseline

SST model is thought to be sufficiently accurate for skin friction prediction [65]. Due to the

curvature of the airfoil surface, a pressure gradient is exerted on the attached boundary layer. The

Reynolds number based on the chord length is Re𝑐 = 6 × 106 , and the Mach number is

approximately 0.15. We use the C-type grid shown in Figure 45 and ensure that Δ𝑦 + ≈ 0.6 for the

first grid layer near the wall. A total of 640 cells are distributed along the airfoil surface, and 120

cells are deployed in the wake. A total of 136 cells are used along the wall-normal direction. The

𝐶𝑓 distribution is shown in Figure 50. Compared with the baseline SST model, the SR-CND model

gives nearly identical results, while the SR-CLS model overpredicts skin friction.
                            Figure 49. The C-type mesh used for NACA0012




                           Figure 50. 𝐶𝑓 distribution along the airfoil surface




5. Conclusions

In our research, we introduced an innovative approach known as conditioned field inversion, which

integrates a shielding function, 𝑓𝑑 , into the corrective factor 𝛽 in the 𝜔 equation. This addition

is designed to maintain the original calibration of the model in the boundary layer during the field

inversion process. We applied both the conditioned and classic field inversion methods to the NASA

hump and the CBFS case. Two models were then developed: the SR-CLS model based on the classic

field inversion dataset and the SR-CND model derived from the conditioned field inversion dataset.

We then evaluated these models across various test scenarios, including separated and wall-attached

flows. Our findings lead to several key conclusions:

1. Both the SR-CLS and SR-CND models demonstrated relatively good performance in separated

flows presented in the paper. The results show that the conditioned field inversion method does not

compromise the ability of the data-driven models to generalize to different separated flows with

similar physical mechanisms (L3 generalizability).



2. The SR-CND model, developed using the conditioned field inversion method, matched the

accuracy of the baseline SST model in scenarios where the baseline model was already effective,

such as the ZPG flat plate and the NACA0012 airfoil at a zero angle of attack. This signifies a high

level of L2 generalizability. Conversely, the SR-CLS model, trained with the classic field inversion
method, failed to maintain this calibration and showed significant errors, indicating poor L2

generalizability.

In summary, our conditioned field inversion method enables the creation of models that not only

have similar L3 generalizability compared with the models created by the classic field inversion

method but also preserve the accuracy of the baseline model for wall-attached flows (L2

generalizability). As demonstrated in our study, achieving this dual capability is challenging with

the classic field inversion method. This highlights the advancements our method has made in the

field of data-driven turbulence modeling.



Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant nos. 12388101,

12372288, U23A2069, and 92152301).



Declaration of Interests

The authors report no conflict of interest.



References

[1]. Duraisamy, K., Iaccarino, G., and Xiao, H., “Turbulence Modeling in the Age of Data,” Annual
     Review     of    Fluid     Mechanics,    Vol.   51,    No.    1,    2019,    pp.    357–377.
     https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-fluid-010518-040547
[2]. Kutz, J. Nathan. “Deep Learning in Fluid Dynamics.” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 814,
     2017, pp. 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2016.803.
[3]. Wang, Xutun, et al. "Flow-field reconstruction in rotating detonation combustor based on
     physics-informed neural network." Physics of Fluids, Vol 35. No.7, 2023, p. 076109.
     https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0154979
[4]. Wang, Xutun, Haocheng Wen, and Bing Wang. "Super-resolution flow-field reconstruction in
     rotating detonation combustors." Aerospace Science and Technology, Vol 144, 2024, p. 108740.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2023.108740
[5]. J. Ling, A. Kurzawski, and J. Templeton, “Reynolds averaged turbulence modeling using deep
     neural networks with embedded invariance,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 807, pp. 155–
    166, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2016.615.
[6]. S. Beetham, R. O. Fox, and J. Capecelatro, “Sparse identification of multiphase turbulence
    closures for coupled fluid–particle flows,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 914, p. A11, 2021.
    https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2021.53.
[7]. Yin, Y., Yang, P., Zhang, Y., Chen, H., and Fu, S., “Feature Selection and Processing of
    Turbulence Modeling Based on an Artificial Neural Network,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 32, No.
    10, 2020, p. 105117. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0022561
[8]. Yin, Y., Shen, Z., Zhang, Y., Chen, H., and Fu, S., “An Iterative Data-Driven Turbulence
    Modeling Framework Based on Reynolds Stress Representation,” Theoretical and Applied
    Mechanics        Letters,     Vol.          12,      No.        5,     2022,       p.      100381.
    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taml.2022.100381
[9]. Schmelzer, M., Dwight, R. P., and Cinnella, P., “Discovery of Algebraic Reynolds-Stress
    Models Using Sparse Symbolic Regression,” Flow, Turbulence and Combustion, Vol. 104, Nos.
    2–3, 2020, pp. 579–603. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10494-019-00089-x
[10]. Wang, Zhiyuan, and Weiwei Zhang. "A unified method of data assimilation and turbulence
    modeling for separated flows at high Reynolds numbers." Physics of Fluids 35.2 (2023).
    https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0136420
[11]. Zhang, Ying, et al. "Research on data assimilation strategy of turbulent separated flow over
    airfoil."   Applied     Mathematics          and     Mechanics       43.4      (2022):     571-586.
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s10483-022-2827-7
[12]. Shan, XiangLin, et al. "Turbulence Modeling via Data Assimilation and Machine Learning for
    Separated     Flows    over    Airfoils."         AIAA     Journal   61.9   (2023):      3883-3899.
    https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J062711
[13]. Duraisamy, K., Zhang, Z. J., and Singh, A. P., “New Approaches in Turbulence and Transition
    Modeling Using Data-Driven Techniques,” presented at the 53rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences
    Meeting, Kissimmee, Florida, 2015. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2015-1284
[14]. Jonathan R. Holland, James D. Baeder and Karthikeyan Duraisamy. "Field Inversion and
    Machine Learning With Embedded Neural Networks: Physics-Consistent Neural Network
    Training," AIAA 2019-3200. AIAA Aviation 2019 Forum, Dallas, Texas. June 2019.
    https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2019-3200
[15]. Srivastava, V., and Duraisamy, K., “Generalizable Physics-Constrained Modeling Using
    Learning and Inference Assisted by Feature-Space Engineering,” Physical Review Fluids, Vol.
    6, No. 12, 2021, p. 124602. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevFluids.6.124602
[16]. X.-L. Zhang, H. Xiao, X. Luo, and G. He, “Ensemble Kalman method for learning turbulence
    models from indirect observation data,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics, Vol. 949, p. A26, 2022.
    https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2022.744.
[17]. J. Wu, H. Xiao, R. Sun, and Q. Wang, “Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes equations with
    explicit data-driven Reynolds stress closure can be ill-conditioned,” Journal of Fluid
    Mechanics, vol. 869, pp. 553–586, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2019.205.
[18]. B. P. Brener, M. A. Cruz, R. L. Thompson, and R. P. Anjos, “Conditioning and accurate
    solutions of Reynolds average Navier–Stokes equations with data-driven turbulence closures,”
    Journal of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 915, p. A110, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2021.148.
[19]. Singh, A. P., Medida, S., and Duraisamy, K., “Machine-Learning-Augmented Predictive
    Modeling of Turbulent Separated Flows over Airfoils,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 55, No. 7, 2017, pp.
    2215–2227. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J055595
[20]. Yan, C., Li, H., Zhang, Y., and Chen, H., “Data-Driven Turbulence Modeling in Separated
    Flows Considering Physical Mechanism Analysis,” International Journal of Heat and Fluid
    Flow, Vol. 96, 2022, p. 109004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2022.109004
[21]. Yan, C., Zhang, Y., and Chen, H., “Data Augmented Turbulence Modeling for Three-
    Dimensional Separation Flows,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 34, No. 7, 2022, p. 075101.
    https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0097438
[22]. Bell, J., Heineck, J., Zilliac, G., Mehta, R., and Long, K., “Surface and Flow Field
    Measurements on the FAITH Hill Model,” presented at the 50th AIAA Aerospace Sciences
    Meeting including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition, Nashville, Tennessee,
    2012. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2012-704
[23]. Bidar, O., S. R. Anderson, and N. Qin, "Sensor placement for data assimilation of turbulence
    models using eigenspace perturbations," Physics of Fluids, Vol. 36, No. 1, 2024, p. 015144.
    https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0182080
[24]. Yan, C., and Zhang, Y., “Local Turbulence Generation Using Conditional Generative
    Adversarial Networks toward Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes Modeling,” Physics of
    Fluids, Vol. 35, No. 10, 2023, p. 105102. https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0166031
[25]. Ling, Julia, and Andrew Kurzawski. "Data-driven adaptive physics modeling for turbulence
    simulations."    23rd   AIAA     Computational     Fluid    Dynamics     Conference.    2017.
    https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2017-3627
[26]. Nishi Y, Krumbein A, Knopp T, Probst A, Grabe C. On the Generalization Capability of a Data-
    Driven Turbulence Model by Field Inversion and Machine Learning. Aerospace. 2024;
    11(7):592. https://doi.org/10.3390/aerospace11070592
[27]. Ferrero, Andrea, et al. "Field inversion and machine learning strategies for improving RANS
    modelling in turbomachinery." 14 th European Conference on Turbomachinery Fluid dynamics
    &     Thermodynamics.        EUROPEAN         TURBOMACHINERY             SOCIETY,       2021.
    https://doi.org/10.29008/ETC2021-617
[28]. Tang, H., Wang, Y., Wang, T., and Tian, L., “Discovering Explicit Reynolds-Averaged
    Turbulence Closures for Turbulent Separated Flows through Deep Learning-Based Symbolic
    Regression with Non-Linear Corrections,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 35, No. 2, 2023, p. 025118.
    https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0135638
[29]. Wu, C., and Zhang, Y., “Enhancing the Shear-Stress-Transport Turbulence Model with
     Symbolic Regression: A Generalizable and Interpretable Data-Driven Approach,” Physical
     Review        Fluids,        Vol.       8,      No.          8,           2023,         p.           084604.
     https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevFluids.8.084604
[30]. P. Spalart, “An old-fashioned framework for machine learning in turbulence modeling, in
     NASA 2022”, presented at the Symposium on Turbulence Modeling: Roadblocks, and the
     Potential for Machine Learning, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Suffolk, VA,
     July 2022.
[31]. Rumsey, C. L., Coleman, G. N., and Wang, L., “In Search of Data-Driven Improvements to
     RANS Models Applied to Separated Flows”, presented at the AIAA SCITECH 2022 Forum,
     San Diego, CA & Virtual, January 2022. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2022-0937
[32]. Pepper, Nick, Joel Ho, and Tim Dodwell. "Probabilistic Machine Learning to Improve
     Generalisation of Data-Driven Turbulence Modeling." Bulletin of the American Physical
     Society, Las Vegas, Nevada. 2023. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.09443
[33]. Florian Jäckel. "A Closed-form Correction for the Spalart-Allmaras Turbulence model for

     Separated Flows", presented at the AIAA SCITECH 2022 Forum, San Diego, CA & Virtual,

     January 2022. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2022-0462

[34]. Bin, Y., Huang, G., Kunz, R., and Yang, X. I. A., “Constrained Recalibration of Reynolds-

     Averaged     Navier–Stokes     Models,”      AIAA   Journal,       Vol.    0,     No.   0,     pp.     1–13.

     https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J063407

[35]. Bin, Yuanwei, et al. "Constrained re-calibration of two-equation Reynolds-averaged Navier–

     Stokes models." Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters 14.2 (2024): 100503.

     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taml.2024.100503

[36]. Spalart, P. R., Deck, S., Shur, M. L., Squires, K. D., Strelets, M. Kh., and Travin, A., “A New

     Version of Detached-Eddy Simulation, Resistant to Ambiguous Grid Densities,” Theoretical

     and     Computational    Fluid      Dynamics,   Vol.   20,        No.     3,    2006,    pp.    181–195.

     https://doi.org/10.1007/s00162-006-0015-0

[37]. Menter, F. R., Kuntz, M., and Langtry, R., “Ten Years of Industrial Experience with the SST

     Turbulence Model,” Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 4, No. 1, 2003, pp. 625–632.

     https://cfd.spbstu.ru/agarbaruk/doc/2003_Menter,%20Kuntz,%20Langtry_Ten%20years%20

     of%20industrial%20experience%20with%20the%20SST%20turbulence%20model.pdf

[38]. Wilcox, David C. Turbulence modeling for CFD. Vol. 2. La Canada, CA: DCW industries,

     1998.

[39]. Rumsey, C. L., “Exploring a Method for Improving Turbulent Separated-Flow Predictions with
     k-ω Models,” NASA TM-2009-215952, 2009.

[40]. Li, H., Zhang, Y., and Chen, H., “Numerical Simulation of Iced Wing Using Separating Shear

     Layer Fixed Turbulence Models,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 59, No. 9, 2021, pp. 3667–3681.

     https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J060143

[41]. Gill, P. E., Murray, W., and Saunders, M. A., “SNOPT: An SQP Algorithm for Large-Scale

     Constrained Optimization,” SIAM Review, Vol. 47, No. 1, 2005, pp. 99–131.

     https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144504446096

[42]. A. C. Duffy, An introduction to gradient computation by the discrete adjoint method, Technical

     report (Florida State University, Florida, 2009), https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/An-

     Introduction-to-Gradient-Computation-by-the-

     Duffy/5278ad3d426c123e2f1642f47fb73d0cd64317ed

[43]. Griewank, Andreas, and Andrea Walther. Evaluating derivatives: principles and techniques of

     algorithmic differentiation. Society for industrial and applied mathematics, 2008.

     https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9780898717761

[44]. Sagebaum, M., Albring, T., and Gauger, N. R., “High-Performance Derivative Computations

     Using CoDiPack,” ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, Vol. 45, No. 4, 2019, p. 38:1-

     38:26. https://doi.org/10.1145/3356900

[45]. He, P., Mader, C. A., Martins, J. R. R. A., and Maki, K. J., “DAFoam: An Open-Source Adjoint

     Framework for Multidisciplinary Design Optimization with OpenFOAM,” AIAA Journal, Vol.

     58, No. 3, 2020, pp. 1304–1319. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J058853

[46]. He, P., Mader, C. A., Martins, J. R. R. A., and Maki, K. J., “An Aerodynamic Design

     Optimization Framework Using a Discrete Adjoint Approach with OpenFOAM,” Computers

     & Fluids, Vol. 168, 2018, pp. 285–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2018.04.012

[47]. He, P., Mader, C. A., Martins, J. R. R. A., and Maki, K., “An Object-Oriented Framework for

     Rapid Discrete Adjoint Development Using OpenFOAM,” presented at the AIAA Scitech 2019

     Forum, San Diego, California, 2019. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2019-1210

[48]. Jasak, H., Jemcov, A., and Tukovic, Z., “OpenFOAM: A C++ Library for Complex Physics

     Simulations,” International workshop on coupled methods in numerical dynamics, Vol. 1000,

     Univ., Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Naval Architecture, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 2007,

     pp. 1–20. https://csabai.web.elte.hu/http/simulationLab/jasakEtAlOpenFoam.pdf
[49]. Cranmer, M., Sanchez Gonzalez, A., Battaglia, P., Xu, R., Cranmer, K., Spergel, D., and Ho,

    S., “Discovering Symbolic Models from Deep Learning with Inductive Biases,” Vol. 33, 2020,

    pp.                                                                                             17429–17442.

    https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/hash/c9f2f917078bd2db12f23c3b413d

    9cba-Abstract.html

[50]. Cranmer,     Miles.   "Interpretable    machine      learning      for   science    with        PySR    and

    SymbolicRegression.jl."            arXiv            preprint          arXiv:2305.01582                (2023).

    https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.01582

[51]. Pope, S. B., “A More General Effective-Viscosity Hypothesis,” Journal of Fluid Mechanics,

    Vol. 72, No. 02, 1975, p. 331. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112075003382

[52]. Li, H., Zhang, Y., and Chen, H., “Aerodynamic Prediction of Iced Airfoils Based on Modified

    Three-Equation Turbulence Model,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 58, No. 9, 2020, pp. 3863–3876.

    https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J059206

[53]. Uzun, Ali, and Mujeeb R. Malik. "Wall-resolved large-eddy simulation of flow separation over

    NASA         wall-mounted     hump."     55th    AIAA Aerospace            Sciences    Meeting.          2017.

    https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2017-0538

[54]. Bentaleb, Y., Lardeau, S., and Leschziner, M. A. “Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulent

    Boundary Layer Separation from a Rounded Step.” Journal of Turbulence, Vol. 13, 2012, p.

    N4. https://doi.org/10.1080/14685248.2011.637923

[55]. Naughton, Jonathan W., S. Viken, and David Greenblatt. "Skin friction measurements on the

    NASA         hump   model."    AIAA      Journal,      Vol.    44,   No.     6,    2006,        pp.1255-1265.

    https://doi.org/10.2514/1.14192

[56]. Xiao, H., Wu, J.-L., Laizet, S., and Duan, L., “Flows over Periodic Hills of Parameterized

    Geometries: A Dataset for Data-Driven Turbulence Modeling from Direct Simulations,”

    Computers           &         Fluids,           Vol.          200,         2020,           p.        104431.

    https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2020.104431

[57]. Zhang, S., Li, H., Zhang, Y., and Chen, H., “Aerodynamic Prediction of High-Lift

    Configuration Using 𝑘 − ̅̅̅
                            𝑣 2 − 𝜔 Turbulence Model,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 60, No. 5, 2022, pp.

    2916–2929. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.J060939

[58]. Rumsey, C., “CFL3D Version 6 Home Page,” NASA, 1980, https://nasa.github.io/CFL3D/
    [retrieved 22 Jan. 2024]

[59]. Van den Berg, Berend. "Boudary layer measurements on a two-dimensional wing with flap."

    NLR-TR       79009       U     (1979).     http://resolver.tudelft.nl/uuid:8e18c13d-b775-4fe2-853c-

    5b7285f7e6b0

[60]. Arlinger, B. G., and T. Larsson. "NLR 7301 two-element airfoil at high lift." Notes on

    numerical fluid mechanics 58 (1997): 375-396.

[61]. Driver, David M., and H. Lee Seegmiller. "Features of a reattaching turbulent shear layer in

    divergent channelflow." AIAA journal 23.2 (1985): 163-171. https://doi.org/10.2514/3.8890

[62]. Wood, D., Passmore, M. A., and Perry, A.-K., “Experimental Data for the Validation of

    Numerical Methods - SAE Reference Notchback Model,” SAE International Journal of

    Passenger Cars       -       Mechanical     Systems, Vol.    7,   No.   1, 2014,    pp.    145–154.

    https://doi.org/10.4271/2014-01-0590

[63]. Ahmed, S. R., Ramm, G., and Faltin, G., “Some Salient Features of The Time-Averaged

    Ground Vehicle Wake,” presented at the SAE International Congress and Exposition, 1984.

    https://doi.org/10.4271/840300

[64]. Lienhart, H., Stoots, C., and Becker, S., “Flow and Turbulence Structures in the Wake of a

    Simplified     Car       Model           (Ahmed     Modell),”     Berlin,    Heidelberg,      2002.

    https://www.jstor.org/stable/44745451

[65]. Rumsey, Christopher. “2D NACA 0012 Airfoil Validation.” NASA, NASA, 2022,

    turbmodels.larc.nasa.gov/naca0012_val.html.

[66]. Wieghardt, K., and Tillmann, W., “On the Turbulent Friction Layer for Rising Pressure,”

    NACA-TM-1314. https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/19930093916
