                                                                          The University of Manchester Research




Assessment of RANS and DES methods for realistic
automotive models
DOI:
10.1016/j.compfluid.2016.01.008


Document Version
Accepted author manuscript


Link to publication record in Manchester Research Explorer


Citation for published version (APA):
Ashton, N., West, A., Lardeau, S., & Revell, A. (2016). Assessment of RANS and DES methods for realistic
automotive models. Computers and Fluids, 128, 1-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2016.01.008


Published in:
Computers and Fluids


Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on Manchester Research Explorer is the Author Accepted Manuscript
or Proof version this may differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the
publisher's definitive version.


General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Explorer are retained by the
authors and/or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.


Takedown policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please refer to the University of Manchester’s Takedown
Procedures [http://man.ac.uk/04Y6Bo] or contact openresearch@manchester.ac.uk providing relevant details, so
we can investigate your claim.




Download date:13. Sep. 2026
       Assessment of RANS and DES methods for realistic automotive models

                                           N. Ashtona , A. Westb , S. Lardeaub , A. Revella
            a Modelling & Simulation Centre, School of Mechanical, Aerospace & Civil Engineering, University of Manchester, U.K
                                                        b CD-adapco, London, U.K




Abstract

This paper presents a comprehensive investigation of RANS and DES models for the Ahmed car body and a realistic
automotive vehicle; the DrivAer model. A variety of RANS models, from the 1-equation Spalart Allmaras model
to a low-Reynolds number Reynolds Stress model have shown an inability to consistently correctly capture the flow
field for both the Ahmed car body and DrivAer model, with the under-prediction of the turbulence in the initial
separated shear layer found as a key deficiency. It has been shown that the use of a hybrid RANS-LES model (in
this case, Detached Eddy Simulation) offers an advantage over RANS models in terms of the force coefficients, and
general flow field for both the Ahmed car body and the DrivAer model. However, for both cases even at the finest
mesh level hybrid RANS-LES methods still exhibited inaccuracies. Suggestions are made on possible improvements,
in particular on the use of embedded LES with synthetic turbulence generation. Finally the computational cost of
each approach is compared, which shows that whilst hybrid RANS-LES offer a clear benefit over RANS models for
automotive relevant flows they do so at a much increased cost.
Keywords:
Hybrid RANS-LES, DDES, Ahmed Body, DrivAer, RANS, Separated Flow, Automotive



1. Introduction

    Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has become one the main design tools for the external aerodynamic design
of modern day vehicles. The computational resources necessary for these simulations has become more affordable,
and commercial software is now sophisticated enough to handle the often complex geometries that are common in
automotive design. For typical automotive configurations a separated wake flow exists behind the car body, which
has a major impact on the drag and fuel efficiency of the vehicle. Whilst there are other important areas around and
within the car, the ability of a CFD simulation to capture this recirculation region is largely a function of the predictive
capability of the turbulence model. For this work, a comparison is made between Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes
(RANS) models (at both eddy-viscosity and second-moment closure levels) and hybrid RANS-LES methods (for
this work, Detached Eddy Simulation (DES)). RANS methods assume that the entire spectrum of turbulence can be


    Email address: neil.ashton@manchester.ac.uk (N. Ashton)

Preprint submitted to Computers & Fluids                                                                                  October 27, 2015
modelled by a set of transport equations which arise from decomposing the turbulence into a mean and fluctuating
component around this mean. The result of this decomposition is an additional term in the Navier-Stokes equation,
named the Reynolds Stress tensor. This term requires additional modelling to close the set of equations. Whilst this
approach has a certain level of empiricism, it is also based on key physical mechanisms observed in canonical flows,
and thus aim to model the turbulence at a much lower cost than higher fidelity methods such as Large Eddy Simulation
(LES). Hybrid RANS-LES methods attempt to provide a compromise between accuracy and computational expense
by only using LES in regions of flow which are challenging to RANS models (such as separated flow) but then use
RANS models elsewhere. Compared to a wall-resolved LES this results in a significant saving of computational
resources.
   Until recently, most validation work for turbulence models in the automotive sector was confined to simple au-
tomotive models such as the Ahmed car body [1, 2] or MIRA/SAE Reference bodies. These bodies resemble a car
in terms of their broad aerodynamic features, but miss some of the features of a complete automotive model. Whilst
different turbulence models have been evaluated on full-car models, these are often internal studies that cannot be
published for confidentiality reasons, and cannot be verified by other groups because of the control on geometry and
experimental data.
   This work aims to assess the capability of the current state of the art RANS and hybrid RANS-LES models (in this
work, DES) for automotive relevant test cases. The desired outcome is to provide industrial users with the information
to make informed choices of whether to use RANS or hybrid RANS-LES approaches, both in terms of their accuracy
and computational expense.
   In this paper the Ahmed car body, a well established automotive test case that combines geometric simplicity with
a comprehensive set of experimental data and prior numerical simulations is firstly studied to provide information
on the performance of both RANS and hybrid RANS-LES models. Finally, a realistic car model is evaluated to
assess whether the conclusions from the Ahmed car hold true for a complete vehicle and also to assess the predictive
capability of these different turbulence modelling approaches for a realistic car model. For this we evaluate the
DrivAer automotive model [3, 4], a recent effort by TUM and Audi/BMW to produce an open-source car model based
closely on realistic complete car geometries with openly available experimental data. The ultimate aim of this paper is
to bring together both academic and industrial type studies to make conclusions that can be relevant to the automotive
industry.
   This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the turbulence models and approaches used in this study,
including information on the validation procedure for the hybrid RANS-LES models. Section 3 provides information
the two test cases studied in this paper, including information on the computational grid, boundary condition and
numerical schemes in use. In Section 4 the results for the two test cases are presented, using both RANS and hybrid
RANS-LES methods. In this section, there is also an analysis of the computational expense of each approach as
well as discussion on possible improvements. Finally Section 5 provides the main conclusions from this work and
suggestions for further work.
                                                          2
2. Turbulence models

   In this paper, a variety of turbulence modelling approaches are assessed. These models represent some of the most
popular RANS models as well as variants of the popular DES approach (as shown in Table 1). One of the central aims
of this work is to assess the current state-of-the art RANS models against one of the most well validated and popular
hybrid RANS-LES models; DES. Whilst this work cannot claim to be fully comprehensive, it represents the range of
models typically found in the majority of CFD codes (both commercial and open source) and therefore provides an
assessment of the current state-of-the-art RANS and DES models for automotive related flows.
   The authors chose DES to represent the hybrid RANS-LES models as this is the model largely in use by the
automotive industry in finite-volume solvers.

                                     RANS Models                                    Hybrid RANS-LES models
                               Spalart Allmaras (SA) [5]                                  SST-DDES [6]
                               Realizable k − ε (RKE) [7]                                 SST-IDDES [8]
                                  k − ω SST (SST) [9]                                     SA-DDES [6]
                     Elliptic Blending k − ε v2 − f (B-EVM) [10]                          SA-IDDES [11]
                Elliptic Blending Reynolds Stress Model (EB-RSM) [12]


                                          Table 1: Turbulence models used in this study


   The principle behind hybrid RANS-LES methods is that a traditional wall-resolved LES is too expensive for
complex high-Reynolds number flows that are influenced by near-wall effects. By applying a RANS model in the
boundary layer and using LES outside of this region, the total cell count can by greatly reduced as RANS models do
not require the same level of grid resolution in the boundary layer. A comprehensive review of hybrid RANS-LES
methods can be found in Frohlich et al. [13], but in this study one particular method is used: DES [6]. This method
has become increasingly popular due to its ease of implementation and demonstrated performance for a range of
applications.
   DES can be seen as a RANS model which performs as a LES sub-grid scale model in regions where the grid is
fine enough to support LES content and as a standard RANS models where the grid is not. In this study we investigate
both standard DDES [6] as well as the variant, IDDES [11], which aims to improve some of the shortcomings of
DDES and add a wall-modelled LES capability. Readers are advised to read the doctoral thesis of Mockett [14] for a
comprehensive explanation of DES models and its variants.


2.1. Validation of DES - Decaying Isotropic Turbulence

   Each DES formulation is validated using Decaying Isotropic Turbulence (DIT) to ensure the correct energy decay
and validate the model constants. Whilst this is a simple, idealised test case, it is a useful first case to ensure correct

                                                               3
levels of dissipation before moving to more complex cases. This is particularly important for commercial CFD codes
which tend to have many numerical options (both default and user selectable). The solution domain of the DIT
calculation is cubic with length 2π. The solution domain is meshed with three grids consisting of 323 , 643 & 1283
cubic and equidistant cells. Periodic boundary conditions are imposed in each direction. The initial velocity field
is set with a suitable instance of isotropic turbulence from the Wray [15] DNS data from the AGARD database. In
order to obtain the initial values for other variables such as the pressure and turbulence quantities (k & ε etc), a frozen
velocity field simulation was conducted, the turbulence variables are solved, which once converged were used as
initial conditions for the unsteady decay of turbulence simulation.
    Calculations were performed with the commercial finite-volume code STAR-CCM+, developed by CD-Adapco.
Additional simulations were conducted using the open-source finite-volume Code Saturne [16] developed by EDF
R&D.
    The temporal discretization is 2nd order, and a fully centred 2nd order scheme is used to spatially discretise the
momentum convective terms unless otherwise stated. A 2nd order upwind scheme is applied to the turbulent quantities.
    Figures 1(a) & 1(b) show the value of the model constant C DDES (which can be seen as an equivalent to the
Smagorinsky constant in LES) for each model using the 323 , 643 & 1283 grids. The C DDES values were selected to
give the appropriate level of dissipation for each model, although with a constant C DDES value it is not possible to
match the DNS data for every mesh resolution. These values agree with the calibrated values from Ashton et al. [17]
as well as those observed by many partners in the EU project ATAAC (Advanced Turbulence Simulation Approaches
for the Aerospace Community) [18].
    Additionally, a 2nd order upwind scheme and a blended central difference scheme were used to illustrate the
importance of using a numerical scheme with low numerical dissipation (Figure 1(c)). It can be seen that using any
scheme other than the fully central scheme gives too much numerical dissipation. This can lead to an over-prediction
of the separation region for such cases as the 2D wall-mounted hump [17] and the Ahmed car body [19].


      10−2                                           10−2                                            10−2


   E(κ)                                           E(κ)                                            E(κ)
      10−3                                           10−3                                            10−3
               Exp.                                           Exp.                                            Exp.
               CDDES = 0.65 (323 )                            CDDEs = 0.61 323                                CDS
               CDDES = 0.65 (643 )                            CDDES = 0.61 643                                CDS/UDS
                                 3
               CDDES = 0.65 (128 )                            CDDES = 0.61 1283                               2nd UDS
      10−4 0                                         10−4 0                                          10−4 0
         10                          101    102         10                            101   102         10                    101         102
                                     κ                                                κ                                       κ

                               (a)                                           (b)                                        (c)

Figure 1: (a) Calibration of the C DDES constant using Decaying Isotropic Turbulence for the SA-DDES model (b) Calibration of the C DDES constant
using Decaying Isotropic Turbulence for the SST-DDES model, (c) Numerical scheme sensitivity study using Decaying Isotropic Turbulence for
the SA-DDES model



                                                                                  4
3. Test Case Descriptions

3.1. Ahmed Car Body

      The Ahmed car body [1][2] represents a generic car geometry with a slanted back and a flat front and has been
extensively tested in the literature [20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. While it is a much simplified version of a real car, it nevertheless
provides many of flow features found in real-life cars such as the complex vortex interactions that occur in its wake and
the large 3D separation region behind the car body itself. The wake behind the car body is a result of the interaction
between the counter-rotating vortices produced by the slant side edges and the separated flow over the rear of the
body (Figure 2(a)). The angle of the slant back section was found to be influential in the structure of the wake and
the reattachment point. At 35o the counter-rotating vortices are weaker, which results in the flow being completely
separated over the entire slant back of the vehicle. At 25o the counter-rotating vortices are strong enough to help to
bring enough momentum into the separation region to reattach the flow half way down the slant back.
      This case has been the focus of several CFD investigations [20, 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 19] where a range of RANS, LES
and hybrid RANS-LES models were investigated. The general conclusions from the studies involving RANS models
[20, 21, 25, 27, 19] were dependant on the slant angle. At 35o (where the separation occurred along the entire slant
back) most of the RANS approaches (both simple linear k − ε and more complex Reynolds stress models) captured
the correct level of the turbulent stresses and, as a result, showed good agreement with the experimental results for
the separation and reattachment points. However at 25o (where the complex interaction between the counter-rotating
vortices and the separated flow results in a shorter separation region) the majority of RANS models,regardless of mesh
refinement or wall treatment, failed to predict the flow correctly. In general, they either failed to predict separation
completely, or even when they did, they did not predict the correct separation point and thus were unable to capture
the correct size of the recirculation region due to an under-prediction of the turbulent stresses [22].
      More recently, a number of LES & DES studies have been performed on this case, mainly at the more challenging
  o
25 slant angle [22, 28, 29, 30, 26, 31, 32, 27, 19]. These studies were performed with a range of sub-grid scale
models and wall-treatments and, while some were more successful than others, many failed to capture fully the
correct recirculation region. The high-Reynolds number (Re = 7.68 × 105 ) meant that even with meshes of up to 48
million cells, the resolution requirements were still not ideal for a wall-resolved LES.


3.1.1. Computational grid and boundary conditions
      The car body was mounted on four stilts z/H = 0.174 (where H = 0.288m is the height of the body) above the
ground in the experiment to model the effect of the car’s height with wheels (and thus capture the important ground
effect). Both the 25o and 35o slant back angles have been investigated in this study to assess the capability of each
model to capture the important changes in flow physics and separation size & strength. The body has a length of
L/H = 3.625, a height of H and a width of W/H = 1.35. The flow is at a Reynolds number of Re = 768, 000
based on the body height H and the free-stream velocity U∞ = 40ms−1 . For both cases, an inlet condition is imposed

                                                              5
                                                         2                                                         E. Serre et al. / Computers & Fluids xxx (2011) xxx–xxx




                                                             Fig. 1. Side, rear and top view of the Ahmed body together with the coordinate system used. Distances are in mm. The slant angle u = 25! in the current analysis.



                                    (a)                                                                                                    (b)
                                                         experiments with the same body and recovered the general obser-                         hardly be met. This can impact the resolved turbulent motion in
                                                         vations of Ahmed. This study provided well-defined LDA measure-                         the shear layer and deteriorate the solution quality.
                                                         ments of mean velocity fields and turbulence statistics at                                  For this reason, hybrid LES/RANS methods have been applied as
                             Figure 2: (a) Ahmed car body flow physics and (b) Ahmed car body dimensions
                                                         Re = 768,000 that are used as reference in the present study.                           well to this flow. The overall strategy with such an approach is to
                                                             In the literature, a certain number of studies are now available                    model the attached turbulent boundary layer in RANS manner
                                                         for the two angles 25! and 35! of the rear slanted surface using                        while LES-type resolution of the large-scale turbulent wake is at-
                                                         different turbulence modeling approaches. Several of these em-                          tempted. Several concepts of hybridization between LES and RANS
                                                         ployed Reynolds-Averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) models such as                            exist, as detailed in [8]. In particular, one can distinguish between
                                                         [10,6,4,29,12]. A review on this topic by F. Menter can be found in                     segregated approaches, where a sharp interface between a steady
                                                         [25]. The cited studies used a large variety of two-equation models,                    RANS and an unsteady LES is used so that the computed solution
at x/H = −7.3 upstream of the body and an outlet condition is imposed x/H = 20.3 downstream. A no-slip wall
                                                         from the standard K ! ! model with wall-function to the K ! x ap-
                                                         proaches including an algebraic treatment of the Reynolds tensor
                                                                                                                                                 is discontinuous there, and unified approaches where the com-
                                                                                                                                                 puted solution is continuous throughout. The latter inevitably
                                                         (EARSM), and also more sophisticated Reynolds Stresses Models.                          leads to a gray zone between the LES and the RANS region. The

condition is imposed on the ground floor and car body, with slip conditions applied to the wind tunnel walls (z/H = 4.8
                                                         The overall conclusion is that while the simulations were relatively
                                                         successful in predicting the 35! case, they did not provide satisfac-
                                                                                                                                                 most prominent unified hybrid approach is Detached Eddy Simula-
                                                                                                                                                 tion (DES) proposed by Spalart et al. [39]. Indeed, the DES of Men-
                                                         tory results for the 25! case. Indeed, for u = 25! the shear due to                     ter and Kuntz [29,30] and Kapadia et al. [20] show globally much
                                                         the partial detachment of the flow on the upper part of the slant pro-                  better results than the ones provided by RANS approaches. They
above and y/H = 3.1 to the side walls). Inlet turbulence levels were found to be largely insensitive due to the large
                                                         vides small scale structures, related to a Kelvin–Helmholtz instabil-
                                                         ity, which significantly increase the momentum transfer across the
                                                                                                                                                 resolve in particular for u = 25! the vortical structures in the wake
                                                                                                                                                 as well as in the shear layer between the freestream and the recir-
                                                         mean streamlines and enhance the three-dimensionality as well as                        culation but do not recover the partial detachment on the slant.

distance between the inlet and car body, thus the turbulent intensity was set to 1%, and ω and ε were computed by
                                                         the unsteadiness of the flow. This type of mechanism is very difficult
                                                         to model by RANS approaches so that the predictions at subcritical
                                                                                                                                                 Mathey and Cokljat [27] presented results for an approach close
                                                                                                                                                 to segregated modeling. They performed a RANS simulation for
                                                         angle generally remain unsatisfactory whatever turbulence model                         the entire flow and then added an LES domain which starts right
                                                         is used. Most of the RANS simulations miss the flow separation at                       at the corner of the slant where the flow separates and covers
assuming the turbulent viscosity ratio νt = 10.          the rear part or, when they accurately predict the separation onset,
                                                         they fail in the massively separated flow regions containing many
                                                                                                                                                 the wake region. The inflow conditions for this subdomain were
                                                                                                                                                 generated from the mean flow of the RANS solution to which syn-
                                                         coherent structures by mainly underpredicting the level of turbu-                       thesized turbulence was superimposed to an amount specified by
                                                         lent stresses [25].                                                                     the RANS solution and generated by means of a vortex method
     For the 25o angle, a structured 16 million cell mesh was used (Figure 3(a)); courtesy of Professor Krajnovic of
                                                             The above remarks suggest that LES may constitute a valuable                        [26]. The coupling back to the RANS domain, which distinguishes
                                                         way to compute the flow around the Ahmed body, particularly                             an LES with particular inflow conditions from a truly hybrid simu-
                                                         for subcritical slant angles. The first LES results [16] using a geom-                  lation, is still missing in this paper, but the results presented show
Chalmers University of Technology. For this mesh, the first near-wall cells over the car body had a y+ < 1 and the
                                                         etry without bottom wall and the Smagorinsky model globally cap-
                                                         tured the topology of the flow for a subcritical slant angle u = 28!
                                                                                                                                                 the quality of the solution which can be achieved with this ap-
                                                                                                                                                 proach. Indeed, the obtained statistical data capture the measure-
                                                         but drag estimation and flow field visualizations were characteris-                     ments very well. Unified approaches on the other hand, if not
                                                         tics of a flow for u > 30!. Several LES studies [13,14,32,21] showed                    employing some type of stochastic forcing, rely on the instability
refinement was concentrated on the near-wall and separation regions.
                                                         that the accuracy of the solution is undeniably improved compared                       of the mean flow in the transition between upstream RANS and
                                                         to the RANS studies. Particularly, the unsteady phenomena are well                      downstream LES region. For the Ahmed body this effect is quite
                                                         described and the solutions almost capture the peak of turbulent                        strong so that substantial unsteady motion is created which in turn
     For the 35o angle, an unstructured polyhedral based mesh (Figure 3(b)), created in STAR-CCM+ was used with
                                                         kinetic energy measured at the beginning of the slant.
                                                             A fundamental problem with LES, however, is the need to re-
                                                                                                                                                 can yield results closer to the experiment than those obtained with
                                                                                                                                                 (U) RANS methods.
                                                         solve the turbulent boundary layer along the roof of the body                               The test case of this paper is the one initially defined in 2001
                                                         which is decisive for adequately capturing the separated shear                          during the 9th ERCOFTAC Workshop on Refined Turbulence Model-
three levels of refinement (Coarse, Medium & Fine). A constant refinement was kept in the near-wall region for
                                                         layer over the slant. Due to the high Reynolds number it is extre-                      ling [46] for a body with subcritical slant angle u = 25! at a
                                                         mely thin with d " 10 mm or d/L " 10!2, as illustrated in Fig. 11 be-                   Reynolds number of Re = 768,000 (note that in [1] the Reynolds
                                                         low. Even if a wall function approach is used as in [13,14], the usual                  number is based on the length of the body). Measurements were
each of these variants, ensuring a y+ < 1 for all near-wall cells. The refinement between the successive meshes was
                                                         resolution requirements in streamwise and spanwise direction can                        performed by Lienhart and Becker [22,23].


                                                          Please cite this article in press as: Serre E et al. On simulating the turbulent flow around the Ahmed body: A French–German collaborative evaluation of LES

concentrated in the rear separation region over the rear window and behind the car. Mesh size were approximately 4,
                                                          and DES. Comput Fluids (2011), doi:10.1016/j.compfluid.2011.05.017




10 and 19 million cells for the coarse, medium and fine meshes respectively and it was found that acceptable mesh
convergence was reached by the fine mesh.
     Calculations were performed using the open-source software Code Saturne v3.0.1 [33] [16] developed by EDF
R&D and STAR-CCM+ v9.04, developed by CD-adapco. The computational details for each code is shown in Table
2.

        Code         Method                Spatial Scheme                                            Temporal Scheme                                                                         Criteria
     STAR-CCM+        RANS                2nd order Upwind                                                          Steady                                                   < 1 × 10−5 residuals
     STAR-CCM+        DDES         Hybrid CDS/2nd UDS [34]                            2nd order (∆tU/L = 1 × 10−4 )                                                                   30 flow units
     Code Saturne    URANS            75% CDS-25% UDS                                 2  nd
                                                                                                order (∆tU/L = 1 × 10 )                                        −4
                                                                                                                                                                                      10 flow units
     Code Saturne     DDES         Hybrid CDS/2nd UDS [17]                            2nd order (∆tU/L = 1 × 10−4 )                                                                   30 flow units


                    Table 2: Numerical setup for each code and turbulence modelling approach for the Ahmed car body




                                                                             6
                                           (a)                                                      (b)

Figure 3: Meshes for the Ahmed car body (a) Structured 16 million cell mesh for 25 degrees case and (b) unstructured 10 million cell mesh for 35
degrees case.



3.2. DrivAer automotive model

    A recent addition to the openly available car geometries is the DrivAer model [3, 4]. In these experiments three car
configurations (shown in Figure 4(a)) were subject to a wind tunnel investigation, where global loads were obtained
as well as surface pressure information in key areas over and under the vehicles. These three configurations represent
three typical car configurations i.e. estate, fastback and notchback. For each configuration, several variants were also
investigated where several components were tested on and off the model (side mirrors and wheels) as well as a smooth
and detailed underbody. In addition each configuration were tested with and without a rolling road to test the effect
of ground simulation. Previous numerical simulations by TUM focused only on the fastback configuration with a
single turbulence model [3]. Whilst some effort was made to ensure mesh convergence and to investigate the effect of
the several geometry variations, no investigation was made into different turbulence models or the other two DrivAer
configurations. The turbulence model in question, the k − ω SST [9] model was used in the study of [3] and also in this
research. The model in [3] used a mesh that did not resolve the near-wall region which makes any direct comparison
difficult, however some key flow areas, such as the bonnet/windscreen intersection, show the same trend between
the previously mentioned work and the authors previous work. Whilst they showed excellent agreement for the drag
coefficient, the pressure distribution over the top and bottom of the car differs from the experiment suggesting that a
certain amount of error cancellation is present. This was also observed in recent work using OVERFLOW, which used
overset structured meshes [35]. Even though a high quality structured mesh was used, the same discrepancies with the
pressure coefficient were observed, which suggests a consistent turbulence modelling error. Guilmineau [36] recently
applied DES models to the DrivAer model, one of the first examples of DES being applied to this case. Unfortunately
only the fastback configuration was studied, however the findings were in agreement with the previous studies. RANS
models (including an Explicit Algebraic RSM model) were unable to correctly predict the forces, particularly the lift
force which was considerably different than the experimental data. They found that DES provided much improved
accuracy (particularly for the lift force) although there were still inaccuracies compared to the experimental data.


                                                                       7
                                   (a)                                                       (b)

                Figure 4: (a) DrivAer models, F-Fastback, E-Estate, N-Notchback (b) DrivAer computational domain Size



3.3. Computational Set-up

3.3.1. Computational Grid and Boundary Conditions
   Two configurations of the DrivAer model are investigated: the Estate and Fastback variants (Figure 4(a)) both
with side mirrors and a smooth underbody. For each configuration the meshing methodology is identical in an attempt
to ascertain the predictive performance of different turbulence models with the mesh being a known source of error.
A schematic of the domain and car is shown in Figure 4(b), the top of the domain (where a slip wall condition is
imposed) is at a height of 8H, where H is the height of the car body. An inlet condition is imposed at the start of the
domain (4L upstream of the car) with a freestream velocity of 40ms−1 (Re = 1.48 × 106 based upon the car height
H = 0.567m), turbulent viscosity ratio of 20 and a turbulent intensity of 1%. The appropriate values for k, ε, ω and
were then derived from these values using the appropriate relationship (e.g. νt = k/ω). An outlet condition is imposed
6L downstream of the rear of the car. The width of the domain is 11W (W is the width of the car), where slip wall
conditions are imposed. The floor was set to a no-slip condition with non-rotating wheels to match the experimental
non-ground simulation case. This was chosen as it removes any rotating tyre modeling error and was also shown to
have little effect on the flow physics [4]. The choice of numerics and time-step are described below and summarized
in Table 3.


3.3.2. STAR-CCM+ : RANS
   A steady coupled incompressible finite-volume solver is used for each RANS calculation. A second order upwind
scheme is used to discretize the convection and diffusion terms of the momentum and turbulence equations. An
Algebraic Multigrid (AMG) method using a V cycle for the momentum equations and a flex cycle for the turbulence
quantities was employed. The solution was initialized using a Grid Sequencing Initialization (GSI) method, which
solves a fully implicit incomplete-Newton solution algorithm to compute a first-order inviscid flow solution on a series
of coarse grids, which provides a better initial flow field than specifying constant values for the flow variables over

                                                                 8
the domain. All simulations were run until the standard deviation of the drag and lift coefficients dropped below
2 × 10−5 over 400 samples. This criteria was in conjunction with the residual error for the momentum and turbulent
equations reaching a monotonic state below 1 × 10−5 . Both of these were used to ensure that the flow had a reached
full convergence, which typically occurred after 2000-5000 iterations depending on the turbulence model.


3.3.3. STAR-CCM+ : DDES
   An unsteady segregated incompressible finite-volume solver was used for all the DES computations. A hybrid
numerical scheme [34] was used to discretize the convective terms of the momentum equations, which switches
between a bounded Central Differencing Scheme (CDS) in regions where LES is active to a 2nd order upwind scheme
where RANS modes are active. For the turbulent quantities, a second order upwind scheme is used. The temporal
discretization was achieved using a 2nd order Crank-Nicholson type scheme with a non-dimensional time-step of
∆tU/L = 1 × 10−3 , ensuring a CFL< 1 throughout the LES regions. An Algebraic Multigrid (AMG) method using a
V cycle for the momentum equations and a flex cycle for the turbulence quantities was employed. The solution was
initialized using the steady RANS results which shortened the time to reach a suitable time for time-averaging. Each
simulation was run for 10 convective flow units (10 × L/U) followed by a further 20 convective units for the gathering
of time-averaged statistics.

       Code          Method             Spatial Scheme                      Temporal Scheme                          Criteria
   STAR-CCM+         RANS              2nd
                                             order Upwind                          Steady                   < 1 × 10−5 residuals
   STAR-CCM+         DDES        Hybrid CDS/2nd UDS [34]             2nd order (∆tU/L = 1 × 10−3 )               30 flow units


                   Table 3: Numerical setup for each code and turbulence modelling approach for the DrivAer model.


   Five grids were generated in total, for which two were used for the DES calculations. These are summarized in
Table 4 and illustrated in Figure 5. The meshes are split into broadly polyhedral/prismatic based for the RANS studies
and hexahedral/prismatic cells for the DES studies. Each of the meshes were successively refined to establish mesh
convergence, each with greater refinement throughout the rear of the domain (except for a constant highly resolved
near-wall mesh, with 20 prism layer cells to ensure the boundary layer was well captured).


4. Results

   To achieve the objective of both comparing a simple and realistic car model and also assessing the potential benefits
of hybrid RANS-LES methods over RANS models, we discuss the performance of the RANS models for both cases
before moving on the performance of the hybrid RANS-LES models. It will be seen that there is a common theme
between the simple and realistic car cases for both RANS and hybrid RANS-LES models.




                                                                 9
                                   Mesh Name                 Mesh Type             y+      Cell Count
                                  RANS coarse           Polyhedral+prism           <1       18 × 106
                                 RANS Medium            Polyhedral+prism           <1       37 × 106
                                    RANS fine           Polyhedral+prism           <1       80 × 106
                                   DES Coarse           Polyhedral+prism           <1       80 × 106
                                    DES Fine            Hexahedral+prism           <1       100 × 106


                                        Table 4: Mesh type and resolution used within this study.




              Figure 5: Slices through the symmetry plane of the meshes used for the DES calculations (estate configuration)



4.1. RANS

4.1.1. Ahmed car body: RANS
   Figure 6 show the results for a selection of RANS models for the Ahmed car body with a 35o rear window angle for
both the streamwise velocity and turbulent kinetic energy (TKE). These results were obtained using STAR-CCM+,
where a mesh convergence study resulted in a final mesh of 10 million cells. Whilst further mesh refinement may
result in some modification of the results, the authors believe that the trends will most likely be very similar. It can be
seen from these figures that the models predict largely the correct flow along the symmetry plane which also reflected
in other planes. Each model shows good agreement with the experimental data for the TKE, it is also notable that there
are only small differences between all the turbulence models, even for a fully separated flow. This is in agreement with
many previous studies, including the ERCOFTAC workshops [20, 21] using a variety of different turbulence models
and grid resolution.
   Figure 7 shows the streamwise velocity and turbulent kinetic energy for the Ahmed car body with a 25 o rear
window angle. None of the RANS models tested correctly predicted the streamwise velocity with each model over-
predicting the size of the recirculation region. It can be seen that this a result of the turbulent kinetic energy being
under predicted in the initial separated shear layer (just after separation) which means less turbulent mixing and thus
a greater recirculation region. It is again observed that there is little difference between the models tested. These re-

                                                                   10
                      380                                                                  500
                      360
                      340                                                                  400

                      320
                                                                                           300
                      300
             Z (mm)




                                                                                  Z (mm)
                      280
                                 Exp.                                                      200
                      260        SST
                      240        RKE
                                                                                           100
                                 B-EVM
                      220
                                 EB-RSM
                      200                                                                    0
                        -240    -200   -160    -120    -80     -40       0                    0       100     200     300   400    500       600
                                                X (mm)                                                                  X (mm)


                                              (a)                                                                     (b)
                      380                                                                  500
                      360
                      340                                                                  400

                      320
                                                                                           300
                      300
             Z (mm)




                                                                                  Z (mm)




                      280
                                 Exp.                                                      200
                      260        SST
                      240        RKE
                                                                                           100
                                 B-EVM
                      220
                                 EB-RSM
                      200                                                                    0
                         -240   -200   -160   -120   -80     -40     0                            0         100     200    300   400   500     600
                                                X (mm)                                                                    X (mm)


                                              (c)                                                                     (d)

Figure 6: Streamwise velocity (a) over and at the (b) rear of the Ahmed car body at 35 degrees and Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) (c) over and
at the (d) rear of the Ahmed car body at 35 degrees for different RANS models



sults are in agreement again with many previous studies, where unsatisfactory performance was observed with RANS
models, both EVM and RSM variants [20, 21]. A common theme from all of these studies was an under-prediction of
the turbulent kinetic energy in the initial separated shear layer, which is also observed here.
    In the work of Ashton et al. [19] a mesh convergence study found that mesh convergence was achieved for all
models on the 16 million cell grid which is currently in use, therefore we discount a lack of grid resolution for the poor
performance of the RANS models. In order to also eliminate code-related errors, the same mesh and models were
tested in the open source finite-volume code, Code Saturne. Whilst the exact numerics and model implementation
may be different between codes, it can be seen in Figure 8 that the models provide similar performance, with all
models over-predicting the separation region. We therefore believe that these results are code-independent.
    As linear eddy-viscosity and Reynolds stress models give nearly identical results (in both codes as well as other
studies), it can also be concluded that it is not purely an issue of models lacking the ability to capture anisotropy or
near-wall modelling (although how well they do this may be contributing to the poor performance). Other ε based
RSM models (such as the LRR model [37]) were tested and yielded no improvement. The under prediction of the
                                                                             11
                      380                                                               500

                      360
                                                                                        400
                      340

                                                                                        300
                      320
             Z (mm)




                                                                               Z (mm)
                      300
                                 Exp.                                                   200

                      280        SST
                                 RKE
                                                                                        100
                      260        B-EVM
                                 EB-RSM
                      240                                                                 0
                        -240   -200   -160   -120   -80    -40    0                        0       100     200     300   400    500       600
                                               X (mm)                                                                X (mm)


                                             (a)                                                                   (b)
                      380                                                               500

                      360
                                                                                        400
                      340

                                                                                        300
                      320
             Z (mm)




                                                                               Z (mm)




                      300
                                                                                        200

                      280
                                                                                        100
                      260

                      240                                                                 0
                        -240   -200   -160   -120    -80    -40       0                        0         100     200    300   400   500     600
                                              X (mm)                                                                   X (mm)


                                             (c)                                                                   (d)

Figure 7: Streamwise velocity (a) over and at the (b) rear of the Ahmed car body at 25 degrees and Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) (c) over and
at the (d) rear of the Ahmed car body at 25 degrees for different RANS models



turbulence in the initial separated shear layer has been investigated in more detail in the work of [19] and this same
failure of common RANS models has been found in a number of other separated flows e.g 2D wall-mounted hump &
2D periodic hills. The authors believe this is an area of potential development for future RANS models, and work is
currently underway by the authors to investigate this in the spirit of work done by Rumsey et al. [38] on sensitising
models to increase the turbulence in this initial separated shear layer.


4.1.2. DrivAer model: RANS
    The same RANS models were applied to the DrivAer case (with the inclusion of the Spalart Allmaras model)
which now represents a realistic car geometry. The results of these for the lift and drag coefficients are summarized in
Table 5 and Figures 9 & 10 are compared to the experimental data and simulations from other research groups. The
results from this study are all using the fine mesh (80 million cells), although it was seen that there was very little
difference between the medium and fine grids for most models, as shown in Figure 11.
    It can be seen firstly that none of the models can correctly predict all the car configurations. Whilst one model may

                                                                          12
                        380                                                         380

                        360                                                         360

                        340                                                         340

                        320                                                         320
               Z (mm)




                                                                           Z (mm)
                        300                                                         300

                        280        Exp.                                             280        Exp.
                                   SST                                                         SST
                        260        B-EVM                                            260        B-EVM
                                   EB-RSM                                                      EB-RSM
                        240                                                         240
                          -240   -200   -160   -120   -80   -40   0                   -240   -200   -160   -120    -80   -40   0
                                                 X (mm)                                                     X (mm)


                                               (a)                                                         (b)

Figure 8: (a) Streamwise velocity and (b) Turbulent Kinetic Energy for different RANS models at y = 0 for the Ahmed car body at 25 degrees with
Code Saturne



perform predict the drag force correctly for one configuration (SST for Fastback), it is unable to predict the correct
drag force for the other car configuration and has a significant error with the lift coefficient. This overprediction of
the lift force is in agreement with the other studies, which each used different meshing strategies and resolution. An
inspection of the drag contribution from each part of the car showed that the majority of the differences between the
models occurred in the rear of the car, which is not surprising as this is the area of greatest flow separation. There
is a noticeable trend towards the RANS models predicting the fastback configuration more accurately, which has no
separation over the rear window compared to the estate configuration. Whilst certain RANS models predict the drag
force better than others (e.g SST compared to EBRSM), this appears to be due to an over-prediction of the lift force,
which in turn produces an induced drag component. None of the RANS models captures the correct lift-to-drag ratio
for either car configuration.
    Table 5 also provides further insight by showing the difference in lift and drag coefficient between the estate and
fastback configurations. Whilst all the models capture the trend of a reduction in drag coefficient, they all fail to
capture the magnitude. Typically for industrial automotive flows it is accepted that RANS models cannot capture
the absolute force coefficients, so instead they are used to assess the magnitude and direction of a trend. Looking at
geometry trends removes constant sources of error, which can be useful for such a complex geometry however such
high errors suggest the models are missing some fundamental flow features between the two configuration (i.e the
extent of the separation region).
    The pressure coefficient over the top of both the fastback and estate vehicles is shown in Figure 12. Inspection
of Figure 12(a) for the fastback vehicle, shows that each model exhibits broadly similar pressure distributions apart
from the region at bottom of the front window/bonnet intersection. Here the SST (in agreement with the results of
Heft et al. [4]) predicts too strong suction. All models under-predict the pressure coefficient (for both the fastback
and estate vehicles) over the roof of the car, which is also seen in Heft et al. [4]. This is likely due to the lack of a

                                                                      13
strut in the CFD model, which connects the car model to the wind tunnel. The flow over the roof of the car should
be attached and therefore simple to capture with any turbulence model. Without also having the precise geometry of
the wind tunnel, it is not possible to match the same blockage conditions. For the estate configuration in Figure 12(b),
there is clear split between the models over the rear portion of the car. This is due to differences in the model ability
to capture the flow separation, which is also reflected in the drag coefficient (SST having the largest drag for greater
flow separation).
   The previous figures have shown the C p along a single plane at the centreline, Figure 13 however provides us with
the pressure coefficient over the rear window of the car for the all the models for both configurations. Here it can be
seen that the fastback is predicted more accurately by all the turbulence models (which is also reflected in the drag
coefficient), with relatively little difference between them. For the estate configuration, the pressure coefficient is far
from the experimental values (which is again reflected in the drag coefficient).
   Figures 14 & 15 shows a visualization of the separated regions of the flow (i.e Ui < 0) for the SST, EBRSM and
the SST-IDDES model (to be discussed in the next section). It can seen that there is a noticeable difference in the
shape of the wake for the both the fastback and estate configurations. These difference is likely to be one of the major
contributions to the difference observed in the lift and drag forces.
   Figures 16-19 show the mean streamwise velocity and modelled & resolved TKE for selected slices along and
behind the car body. Whilst these are only selected slices, they show different wake patterns behind the two example
RANS models (SST & EBRSM) although the difference is relatively small at these positions. The major observation
from these figures is the under-prediction of TKE compared to the hybrid RANS-LES solutions. Although there is no
experimental data to compare against this under-prediction of the TKE relative to the hybrid RANS-LES results, this
agrees closely with the Ahmed car body at 25o , and suggests a common source of error from the RANS models.
   This inability to correctly predict the flow regardless of the turbulence model, mesh (mesh refinement was eval-
uated up to 80 million cells) was a major motivation to test the hybrid RANS-LES models in this paper. Whilst it
cannot be said that no RANS model could ever predict the flow correctly, the current state of the art models have not
showed acceptable performance both for the Ahmed car body and this realistic car model.


4.2. Hybrid RANS-LES

   It has been shown for both the Ahmed car body and DrivAer vehicle that no RANS model is capable of predicting
the flow correctly for all configurations. This suggests that whilst they may offer good predictive capability for
particular flow types, they are unable to consistently provide good enough accuracy (i.e within 5% of absolute loads).
For this reason we evaluate hybrid RANS-LES models, in particular Detached Eddy Simulation initially for the
Ahmed car body (at the more challenging 25 o degrees) and then later the DrivAer realistic car geometry. These type
of methods offer close to the theoretical predictive capability of LES models but with much reduced computational
resources.


                                                            14
                                                                      Estate              Fastback            Vehicle Delta
                                 Model
                                                                CD           CL         CD          CL         CD          CL
                                  Exp.                        0.294       -0.12       0.261        0.01       0.033       0.13
                   k − ω SST from Heft et al. [3]               n/a          n/a      0.243        n/a         n/a         n/a
                 k − ω SST from Peters et al. [35]              n/a          n/a      0.256       0.069        n/a         n/a
                  EARSM from Guilmineau [36]                    n/a          n/a      0.254       0.079        n/a         n/a
                        Spalart Allmaras (SA)                 0.280       0.054       0.260       0.136       0.02       0.084
                       Realizable k − ε (RKE)                 0.260       -0.026      0.244       0.085       0.016       0.11
                               k − ω SST                      0.275      0.0436       0.260       0.124       0.00        0.08
                             k − ε B-EVM                      0.253       0.007      0.2435       0.116      0.0095      0.109
                                EB-RSM                        0.256       -0.029     0.2482       0.075      0.0078      0.104
                 SST-DES from Guilmineau [36]                   n/a          n/a      0.266       0.024        n/a         n/a
                        SST IDDES (Coarse)                    0.310       -0.096      0.268       0.011       0.042      0.107
                          SST IDDES (Fine)                    0.307       -0.131     0.2615       0.024      0.0455      0.155
                          SA IDDES (Fine)                     0.313       -0.136        n/a        n/a         n/a         n/a
                           SA DDES (Fine)                     0.307       -0.13         n/a        n/a         n/a         n/a


Table 5: Lift and drag coefficients for the computational and experimental results for the fastback and estate configurations of the DrivAer using
different RANS models on 80 million fine RANS mesh and a range of DES variants on the coarse and fine meshes




                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                  Estate
                                                                                                                                  Fastback
                 0.30

                 0.25

                 0.20
            CD




                 0.15

                 0.10

                 0.05

                 0.00
                        Exp.


                                SA


                                          RKE


                                                     SST


                                                               B-EVM


                                                                         EB-RSM


                                                                                   SST-IDDES (C)


                                                                                                   SST-IDDES (F)


                                                                                                                   SA-IDDES (F)


                                                                                                                                   SA-DDES (F)
                    Figure 9: Drag Coefficient for the estate and fastback configurations using RANS and DES models



4.2.1. Ahmed car body: DES
   Figure 20 shows the mean streamwise velocity and turbulent kinetic energy over and behind the Ahmed car body
using the SST, EBRSM and SST-IDDES models. It can be seen that the SST-IDDES model provides an improved
prediction of the streamwise velocity as a result of predicting a large TKE in the initial separated region. There is
still however a clear under-prediction of the TKE in the initial separated shear layer which means too little turbulent
mixing and an over-prediction of the separation region. This is visualized more clearly in Figure 21 which shows the
regions of separated flow for the SST, EBRSM and SST-IDDES models, it’s clear that the RANS model predict a much
larger recirculation region compared to the SST-IDDES model. To assess if this can be improved by either ulitizing
a different underlying RANS models or a different DES variant, Figure 22 shows the results for the SA IDDES and
SA-DDES models. It can be seen that there is very little sensitivity to either the DES variant or underlying RANS
models for this case, with none improving the underprediction of TKE in the initial separated shear layer region.
   To establish that any errors do not arise from the use of STAR-CCM+ (i.e the codes numerics or implementation),
the same case and mesh was run in Code Saturne using the SST-DDES model (as shown in Figure 22(c)). It can be
seen that there is little or no difference between this and the all the DES variants run in STAR-CCM+. This is further
seen through the visualization of iso-contours in Figure 23, where there is little difference in the structures observed.
   For all the DES variants, there is a clear improvement over the RANS models in the prediction of both the turbulent
kinetic energy and the streamwise velocity. However, there is still an underprediction of the turbulence in the initial
separated shear layer, as shown in Figure 22(c). This exists no matter the grid refinement (up to 16 million cells [19],

                                                                  16
                0.20
                                                                                                                                   Estate
                                                                                                                                   Fastback
                0.15


                0.10


                0.05
           CL




                0.00


                -0.05


                -0.10
                                 SA
                        Exp.




                                            RKE

                                                      SST

                                                                B-EVM

                                                                          EB-RSM




                                                                                                                                     SA-DDES (F)
                                                                                                                    SA-IDDES (F)
                                                                                    SST-IDDES (C)

                                                                                                    SST-IDDES (F)


                   Figure 10: Lift coefficient for the estate and fastback configurations using RANS and DES models



DES model formulation (IDDES, DDES) nor the code itself (STAR-CCM+, Code Saturne). Further analysis of this
case can be found in Ashton et al. [19], including more detailed analysis of the failure of the RANS and DES variants.


4.2.2. DrivAer Model: DES
   It was seen that using hybrid RANS-LES for the Ahmed car body, provided an improvement over all RANS
models in terms of a more accurate prediction of the separation region (although still not in complete agreement with
experimental data). As the conclusions from the RANS study of both the Ahmed car body and DrivAer were similar,
we now apply hybrid RANS-LES methods to the DrivAer vehicle to assess if these also provide an improvement.
   We evaluate two meshes for the hybrid RANS-LES calculations, a coarse 80 million cell grid composed of prism
cells in the boundary layer and polyhedral cells away from the wall, this is the same as the fine grid used in the RANS
simulations. Secondly we use a mesh of 100 million cells, with now hexahedral cells away from the wall to provide
a more structured cell layout. A third finer mesh was evaluated but insufficient time-sampling has taken place (initial
results show little difference between this and the 100 million cell grid). These meshes are summarized in Table 4.
   The results for the force coefficients are shown in Table 5 and Figures 9 & 10 for the fastback and estate config-
urations, as well as the pressure coefficient in Figure 24. The results firstly show that all hybrid RANS-LES results


                                                                 17
                  0.32                                                           0.32
                                                             SST                                                            SST
                  0.31                                       RKE                 0.31                                       RKE
                                                             SA                                                             SA
                  0.30                                       B-EVM               0.30                                       B-EVM
                                                             EB-RSM                                                         EB-RSM
                  0.29                                                           0.29
             Cd




                                                                            Cd
                  0.28                                                           0.28
                  0.27                                                           0.27
                  0.26                                                           0.26
                  0.25                                                           0.25
                  0.24                                                           0.24
                     10    20     30    40        50   60     70      80            10     20     30   40        50   60     70      80
                                Mesh Size (×106 cells)                                          Mesh Size (×106 cells)

                                        (a)                                                            (b)

                            Figure 11: Mesh Refinement for the fastback & estate configuration using RANS models


                                                             Exp.                                                           Exp.
                  1.0                                                                1.0
                                                             SST                                                            SST
                                                             RKE                                                            RKE
                                                             SA                                                             SA
                  0.5                                        B-EVM                   0.5                                    B-EVM
                                                             EB-RSM                                                         EB-RSM
             Cp                                                                 Cp
                  0.0                                                                0.0


                −0.5                                                             −0.5


                −1.0                                                             −1.0
                            0.0          0.5           1.0         1.5                     0.0          0.5           1.0         1.5
                                              x                                                              x

                                        (a)                                                            (b)

Figure 12: (a) Pressure Coefficient over the top of the Fastback configuration for each RANS model. (b) Pressure Coefficient over the top of the
Estate configuration for each RANS model.



(regardless of mesh resolution or DES variant) provide a better prediction of the flow for both vehicle configurations.
This is most noticeable for the lift coefficient, which was poorly predicted by the RANS models, but predicted rel-
atively well for all the hybrid RANS-LES models. Interestingly, in a similar fashion to the Ahmed car body, there
is relatively little difference between the DES variants (SA IDDES, DDES, SST-IDDES) for this flow, although this
might be more pronounced with a finer mesh and/or the addition of inflow turbulence.There is a noticeable improve-
ment with the fine mesh for the SST-IDDES computations, which suggests that the polyhedral mesh has additional
numerical dissipation (as there is only 20 million cells difference between coarse and fine meshes).
    Table 5 also provides the change in drag coefficient between the Estate and Fastback configurations. Compared
to the RANS results it can be seen that not only is the direction of the trend correct but the magnitude is much closer
with the hybrid RANS-LES models which combined with the absolute values, makes the hybrid RANS-LES much

                                                                           18
                                                                     (a)




                                                                     (b)

Figure 13: Mean Pressure Coefficient distribution for the (a) Fastback and (b) Estate vehicles for Experimental data and RANS CFD simulations




                      (a)                                           (b)                                            (c)

 Figure 14: Volume render, showing separation regions for (a) SST RANS, (b) EBRSM RANS and (c) SST-IDDES model for fastback vehicle



more accurate overall than any of the RANS models. These differences can be seen in the wake structures in Figures
14 & 15 for the fastback and estate configurations respectively. In a similar fashion to the Ahmed car body, the
RANS models predict a larger recirculation region and a different wake structure than the hybrid RANS-LES models.
Whilst there is no experimental data for the 3D wake, the close agreement with both the lift and drag for the hybrid
RANS-LES models suggests this is a more accurate representation of the wake structures.
   Figure 13 also shows the C P distribution over the rear window of the Estate and Fastback configurations against
the RANS and experimental data [4]. For the fastback configuration, both RANS and DES methods predict a similar




                      (a)                                           (b)                                            (c)

  Figure 15: Volume render, showing separation regions for (a) SST RANS, (b) EBRSM RANS and (c) SST-IDDES model for estate vehicle



                                                                    19
                                     (a)                                                         (b)

Figure 16: Mean Streamwise velocity at selected slices of the Fastback vehicle for the SST & EBRSM RANS models and the SST-IDDES model
on the coarse and fine mesh




                              (a)                                                          (b)

Figure 17: (a) Mean Modelled Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) & (b) Mean Resolved Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) at selected slices of the
Fastback vehicle for the SST & EBRSM RANS models and the SST-IDDES model on the coarse and fine mesh




Figure 18: Mean Streamwise Velocity at selected slices of the Estate vehicle for the SST & EBRSM RANS models and the SST-IDDES model on
the coarse and fine mesh



                                                                  20
                                (a)                                                                   (b)

Figure 19: (a) Mean Modelled Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) & (b) Mean Resolved Turbulent Kinetic Energy (TKE) at selected slices of the
Estate vehicle for the SST & EBRSM RANS models and the SST-IDDES model on the coarse and fine mesh




                      380                                                               500
                                                                                                                        Exp.
                      360                                                                                               SST RANS
                                                                                        400                             EB-RSM RANS
                      340                                                                                               SST IDDES
                                                                                        300
                      320
             Z (mm)




                                                                               Z (mm)




                      300
                                                                                        200

                      280        Exp.
                                 SST RANS
                                                                                        100
                      260        EB-RSM RANS
                                 SST IDDES
                      240                                                                 0
                        -240   -200   -160   -120   -80    -40    0                        0   100   200    300   400   500   600
                                               X (mm)                                                         X (mm)


                                             (a)                                                            (b)
                      380                                                               500
                                                                                                                        Exp.
                      360                                                                                               SST RANS
                                                                                        400                             EB-RSM RANS
                      340                                                                                               SST IDDES
                                                                                        300
                      320
             Z (mm)




                                                                               Z (mm)




                      300
                                                                                        200

                      280        Exp.
                                 SST RANS
                                                                                        100
                      260        EB-RSM RANS
                                 SST IDDES
                      240                                                                 0
                        -240   -200   -160   -120    -80    -40       0                    0   100   200    300   400   500   600
                                              X (mm)                                                          X (mm)


                                             (c)                                                            (d)

Figure 20: (a) Mean Streamwise velocity along and (b) behind the Ahmed car body and (c) Mean turbulent kinetic energy along and (d) behind the
Ahmed car body for the SST & EBRSM RANS and SST-IDDES models



                                                                          21
                                     (a)                                                          (b)                                                            (c)

Figure 21: Visualization of the separated flow for the Ahmed car body using the (a) SST RANS, (b) EBRSM RANS and (c) the SST-IDDES model




              380                                                          380                                                          380

              360                                                          360                                                          360

              340                                                          340                                                          340

              320                                                          320                                                          320

                                                                                                                               Z (mm)
     Z (mm)




                                                                  Z (mm)




              300                                                          300                                                          300

              280                                                          280                                                          280
                         Exp.                                                         Exp.                                                         Exp.

              260        SA-IDDES                                          260        SA-IDDES                                          260        SST-IDDES
                         SST-IDDES                                                    SA-DDES                                                      SST-DDES SATURNE
              240                                                          240                                                          240
                -240   -200   -160   -120   -80   -40   0                    -240   -200   -160   -120   -80   -40   0                    -240   -200     -160   -120   -80   -40   0
                                       X (mm)                                                       X (mm)                                                         X (mm)



                                     (a)                                                          (b)                                                            (c)

Figure 22: Mean Streamwise velocity along the Ahmed car body for the (a) SA-IDDES and SST-IDDES models, (b) SA-IDDES and SA-DDES
models and (c) SST-IDDES and SST-DDES (Code Saturne) models.




                                                            (a)                                                          (b)

Figure 23: (a) Iso surface contours of the λ2 function (λ2 = 200) for the Ahmed car body using the SST-IDDES model, (b) the SST-DDES model
in Code Saturne




                                                                                                  22
distribution to the experimental data, however both slightly under-predict the pressure recovery. For the Estate con-
figuration neither the RANS and DES methods can capture the correct distribution. Note that the scaling has been
changed to make the differences between RANS and DES more visible. There may however be differences due to the
exact wind tunnel domain not being replicated in the CFD models which could affect the pressure coefficient. Both
DES and RANS models over-predict the negative pressure on the rear, which indicates too large separation prediction.
Unfortunately there is no skin-friction or oil flow data from the experiment but it is clear the estate configuration is
most challenging. The DES models provide better agreement than the RANS which is reflected somewhat in the drag
coefficient.
    We can see from all the previous figures that firstly no RANS model can correctly predict the C D or C p for any
configuration and that whilst the DES methods give a better prediction they still cannot predict the correct flow,
particularly for the estate configuration. It is important to try to ascertain how the DES models provide this improved
accuracy.


Turbulence levels
    Figure 17 shows both the modeled and resolved TKE for the fastback vehicle. Whilst there is no experimental data
to compare to, we can see that firstly the modeled contribution is small (5%) in comparison to the resolved content
suggesting that the models are operating in LES mode at these locations. This does not however tell us whether the
resolved turbulence levels are high enough. For the Ahmed body it was found that all RANS models under-predicted
the level of turbulence in the initial separated shear layer and that also even DES variants on a fine mesh still under-
predicted the values compared to the experimental data [19]. In Figure 17(b), the level of TKE predicted by the
SST-RANS model can be compared to the resolved TKE from the DES results. In a similar fashion to the Ahmed car
body it can be seen that the RANS model predicts a lower value of TKE than any of the DES variants. This helps to
explain why the RANS models exhibits greater flow separation in Figure 16(b), as reduced levels of TKE would result
in lower levels of turbulent mixing and a greater recirculation region.
    Figures 18 & 19 show the mean streamwise velocity, modeled TKE and resolved TKE for the estate configuration
for different DES variants and the SST-RANS model. A similar conclusion to the fastback can be observed where the
RANS model predicts a lower level of TKE and as a consequence shows a larger recirculation region than any of the
DES variants.
    Whilst it has been established that the DES variants provides better accuracy on both car configurations than
RANS models, they still exhibit errors with the lift & drag coefficients and also for the Cp over the rear window. So
far it has been shown that the relative RANS-DES performance for the DrivAer cars appear to match the traits from
the Ahmed car body (in terms of TKE and recirculation size), thus it is therefore likely that the level of TKE is still
under-predicted in the initial separated shear layer which results in too large recirculation length.




                                                           23
4.3. Embedded LES

   The solution for the Ahmed car body (as detailed in Ashton et al. [19]) was to inject synthetic turbulence (via
the DFSEM approach [39]) in a one-way coupled embedded DES region, thereby over-coming the lack of TKE in
the initial separated shear layer. This provided the unsteady velocity fluctuations prior to the separation point, which
allowed the flow to move into a fully resolved state in the initial separated shear layer. This showed very promising
performance for the Ahmed car body (as shown in Figure 25) and provided much closer prediction of the turbulence
in the initial separated shear layer. As this was a one-way coupled approach, it meant cutting the domain and car prior
to the separation point and placing an inlet boundary condition on this plane, at which synthetic turbulence could be
produced.
   Unfortunately for a realistic configuration, like the DrivAer model, this approach would not be suitable. Cutting
the car in half firstly poses a challenge for the modelling of the vortices that move down the car, which may be
disturbed by such an approach and secondly there is an obvious coupling effect of the rear separation on the whole
circulation of the car, thus only a two-way coupled approach would be suitable (which is also strictly true for the
Ahmed car body). The authors are currently working on developing such an approach but at present this was not
available to evaluate. Nevertheless it is of the opinion of the authors that injecting synthetic turbulence prior to the
separation point would help overcome the current shortcomings of the DES approach, in a similar fashion to the
Ahmed car body, and hopefully provide an even closer agreement to the experimental data.


4.4. Computational Expense

   A major consideration for industrial users of CFD is not only the accuracy of the method but also the computational
cost. Whilst it has shown that hybrid RANS-LES methods, in particular DES provides a clear advantage over RANS
models for the two test-cases evaluated, it is important to also assess the computational cost of each approach. For
this, shown in Table 6, we compare a RANS simulation using the SST model on the DrivAer fastback configuration
to the SST-IDDES model used also on the DrivAer fastback configuration. A constant number of cells per core is
used to decide upon the total number of cores used; 144,000 cells per core in this case. This represents the scalability
possible with the majority of industrial CFD codes.
   The RANS simulations were run steady-state so the number of iterations required to reach the convergence criteria
is stated. For the SST-IDDES simulation a dual-time stepping transient approach is used, thus the time per iteration is
now the time per time step (of which 5 inner iterations are used). We calculate a relative cost based upon the additional
compute time as well as the additional computational expense of using more HPC resources. It can be seen that the
hybrid RANS-LES simulation is 17 times more expensive than the RANS computation. Whilst these values could be
increased or decreased depending on specific optimzation of the mesh or solution strategy this difference explains why
RANS models are still the workhorse of many industries. Nevertheless, with the inaccuracies highlighted in this paper
of the current state-of-the-art RANS models, the additional computational time should now be deemed necessary.


                                                           24
    Whilst the current turnaround time is 2 days (on 704 cores), increased scalability of CFD codes and greater access
to HPC resources could bring this under 24 hours, as highlighted in Table 6 when using 2048 cores on MareNostrum
HPC facility at Barcelona Supercomputing Centre (BSC). On the other hand, improved RANS models capable of
providing accuracy closer to hybrid RANS-LES would become very attractive and thus it is the opinion of the authors
that there is a still a real need for further research to produce improved RANS models, particularly for complex
separated flows.

                          Table 6: Computational expense of each RANS and DES simulation for the DrivAer vehicle




    Method             Cells        Cores 1        Temporal Scheme               Time per iteration          Compute time   Relative cost 2
  SST RANS           80 × 106          512                Steady                    6s (2500 it.)                 4 hrs           1
                               6                                       −5
 SST IDDES          100 × 10           704        Transient (5 × 10 )           7s (26,000 t. steps)              50 hrs          17
 SST IDDES          100 × 106        20483        Transient (5 × 10−5 )        2.5s (26,000 t. steps)             18 hrs          17




5. Conclusions

    A comprehensive investigation of RANS and DES models for the Ahmed car body and a realistic automotive
model has been conducted. A variety of RANS models, from the one-equation Spalart Allmaras model to a low-
Reynolds number Reynolds Stress model have shown an inability to consistently correctly capture the flow for both
these cases with the under-prediction of the turbulence in the initial separated shear layer a key deficiency. It has been
shown that the use of a hybrid RANS-LES model (in this case, Detached Eddy Simulation) offers an advantage over
RANS models in terms of the force coefficients, and general flow field for both the Ahmed car body and the DrivAer
model. However, for both cases even at the finest mesh level they could not correctly capture the flow. The use of
an embedded LES approach with the injection of synthetic turbulence is discussed, and results from using such an
approach on the Ahmed car body is briefly presented, however it is noted that further work is required to make this
suitable for a complete vehicle simluation. Finally the computational expense of each approach is discussed, showing
that hybrid RANS-LES methods are still many times more expensive than steady RANS, which suggests that further
work to improve RANS modelling is still an important area, largely because of the potential cost benefit.


   1 Using 2.6 GHz Intel Sandy Bridge processors (16 cores per node with 64GB memory), with Mellanox QDR Infiniband
   2 Relative cost calculated as additional compute time × additional cost of HPC resource (e.g number of cores used)
   3 Performed on MareNostrum at Barcelona Supercomputing Centre (BSC) using 2.6 GHz Intel Sandy Bridge Xeon processors (16 cores per

node with 32GB memory), with Mellanox FDR Infiniband




                                                                      25
                                                        Exp.                                                                 Exp.
                       1.0                                                                  1.0
                                                        SST RANS                                                             SST RANS
                                                        SST IDDES Coarse                                                     SST IDDES Coarse
                                                        SST IDDES Fine                                                       SST IDDES Fine
                       0.5                                                                  0.5
             Cp                                                                   Cp
                       0.0                                                                  0.0


                  −0.5                                                                 −0.5


                  −1.0                                                                 −1.0
                                 0.0           0.5          1.0        1.5                            0.0           0.5          1.0           1.5
                                                    x                                                                    x

                                              (a)                                                                  (b)

Figure 24: (a) Mean Pressure Coefficient over the top of the Fastback configuration for each mesh using the SST IDDES model. (b) Mean Pressure
Coefficient over the top of the Estate configuration for each mesh using the SST IDDES model.



Acknowledgements

    The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from CD-adapco and also BETA-CAE Systems for providing
the ANSA pre-processing tool. The authors gratefully acknowledge computational support from EPSRC for UK’s
National HPC Facility, ARCHER and Barcelona Supercomputing Centre (BSC) for time on Mare Nostrum. This
work also made use of the facilities of N8 HPC provided and funded by the N8 consortium and EPSRC (Grant
No.EP/K000225/1). The Centre is co-ordinated by the Universities of Leeds and Manchester. Finally the authors
would like to thank the Institute of Aerodynamics and Fluid Mechanics at Technische Universitat Munchen for pro-
viding the CAD data of the DrivAer models.

                      380                                                                  380

                      360                                                                  360

                      340                                                                  340

                      320                                                                  320
                                                                                  Z (mm)
             Z (mm)




                      300                                                                  300

                      280        Exp.                                                      280
                                 SST URANS
                      260        SST DDES                                                  260
                                 SST E-DDES
                      240                                                                  240
                        -240   -200    -160   -120   -80    -40    0                         -240   -200    -160   -120    -80     -40     0
                                                X (mm)                                                              X (mm)


                                              (a)                                                                  (b)

Figure 25: (a) Mean Streamwise velocity along the Ahmed car body for the SST-URANS, SST-DDES and SST-E-DDES models. (b) Mean
Turbulent Kinetic Energy along the Ahmed car body for the SST-URANS, SST-DDES and SST E-DDES models.




                                                                             26
References

 [1] Ahmed SR, Ramm G, Faltin G. Some salient features of the time averaged ground vehicle wake. SAE-Paper 840300 1984;.
 [2] Lienhart H, Becker S. Flow and turbulent structure in the wake of a simplified car model. SAE 2003;01(1):0656.
 [3] Heft AI, Adams NA. Experimental and numerical investigation of the drivaer model. In: Proceedings of the ASME 2012 Fluids Engineering
     Summer meeting. 2012, p. 1–11.
 [4] Heft AI, Indinger T, Adams NA.           Introduction of a New Realistic Generic Car Model for Aerodynamic Investigations.          SAE
     2012;doi:10.4271/2012-01-0168.
 [5] Spalart PR, Allmaras SR. A one-equation turbulence model for aerodynamic flows. La Recherche Aerospatiale 1994;1:5–21.
 [6] Spalart PR, Deck S, Shur ML, Squires KD, Strelets MK, Travin A. A New Version of Detached-eddy Simulation, Resistant to Ambiguous
     Grid Densities. Theor Comput Fluid Dynam 2006;20(3):181–95. doi:10.1007/s00162-006-0015-0.
 [7] Shih T, Liou WW, Shabbir A, Yang Z, Zhu J. A new k-epsilon eddy viscosity model fo high Reynolds number turbulent flows. Computers
     & Fluids 1995;24(3):227–38.
 [8] Gritskevich MS, Garbaruk AV, Menter FR. Fine-tuning of DDES and IDDES formulations to the k-w Shear Stress Transport model. In: 4th
     European Conference for Aerospace Sciences EUCASS4. 2011, p. 1–10.
 [9] Menter FR. Two-Equation Eddy-Viscosity Turbulence Models for Engineering Applications. AIAA 1994;32(8):1598–605.
[10] Billard F, Laurence D. A robust k/k elliptic blending turbulence model applied to near-wall, separated and buoyant flows. International
     Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2012;33(1):45–58. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2011.11.003.
[11] Shur ML, Spalart PR, Strelets MK, Travin AK. A hybrid RANS-LES approach with delayed-DES and wall-modelled LES capabilities.
     International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2008;29(6):1638–49. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2008.07.001.
[12] Lardeau S, Manceau R. Computations of complex flow configurations using a modified Elliptic-Blending Reynolds-Stress Model. In:
     ETMM10: 10th International ERCOFTAC Symposium on Engineering. 2014,.
[13] Fröhlich J, von Terzi D. Hybrid LES/RANS methods for the simulation of turbulent flows. Progress in Aerospace Sciences 2008;44:349–77.
[14] Mockett C. A comprehensive study of detached-eddy simulation. Ph.D. thesis; TUB; 2009.
[15] Wray A. Unpublished DNS data. Available on AGARD database Test Cases for the Validation of Large- Eddy Simulations of Turbulent
     Flows. 1997.
[16] Fournier Y, Bonelle J, Moulinec C, Shang Z, Sunderland A, Uribe J. Optimizing Code Saturne computations on Petascale systems. Computers
     and Fluids 2011;45(1):103–8. doi:10.1016/j.compfluid.2011.01.028.
[17] Ashton N, Prosser R, Revell A. A hybrid numerical scheme for a new formulation of delayed detached-eddy simulation (DDES) based on
     elliptic relaxation. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series; vol. 318. 2011, p. 042043. doi:10.1088/1742-6596/318/4/042043.
[18] Schwamborn D, Strelets M. ATAAC An EU-Project Dedicated to Hybrid RANS-LES methods. In: Progress in Hybrid RANS-LES
     Modelling; vol. 117 of Notes on Num. Fluid Mech. and Multidisc. Design. 2012, p. 59–75.
[19] Ashton N, Revell A.            Key factors in the use of DDES for the flow around a simplified car.                   International Jour-
     nal of Heat and Fluid Flow 2015;54:236–49.         URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0142727X15000673.
     doi:10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2015.06.002.
[20] Jakirlić S, Jester-Zurker R, Tropea C. Report on 9th ERCOFTAC/IAHR/COST Workshop on Refined Turbulence Modelling. In: ERCOFTAC
     Bulletin. Darmstadt University of Technology; 2002, p. 36–43.
[21] Manceau R, Bonnet JP, Leschziner M, Menter FR. 10th Joint ERCOFTAC(SIG-15)/IAHR/QNET-CFD Workshop on Refined Flow Mod-
     elling. Universite de Poitiers; 2002,.
[22] Serre E, Minguez M, Pasquetti R, Guilmineau E, Deng GB, Kornhaas M, et al. On simulating the turbulent flow around the Ahmed body: A
     FrenchGerman collaborative evaluation of LES and DES. Computers \& Fluids 2013;78:10–23. doi:10.1016/j.compfluid.2011.05.017.
[23] Mathey F, Cokljat D. Zonal multi-domain RANS/LES simulation of airflow over the Ahmed body. In: Rodi W, Mulas M, editors. Engineering
     turbulence modelling and experiments (ETMM 6). 2005, p. 647–56.



                                                                     27
[24] Caridi D, Cokljat D, Schuetze J, Lechner R. Embedded Large Eddy Simulation of Flow around the Ahmed Body. SAE World Congress
     2012;doi:10.4271/2012-01-0587.
[25] Haase W, Aupoix B, Bunge U, Schwamborn D, editors. FLOMANIA - A European Initiative on Flow Physics Modelling; vol. 94 of Notes
     on Numerical Fluid Mechanics and Multidisciplinary Design. Springer-Verlag; 2006.
[26] Haase W, Braza M, Revell A. DESider - A European Effort on Hybrid RANS-LES Modelling; vol. 103 of Notes on Numerical Fluid
     Mechanics and Multidisciplinary Design. Springer-Verlag; 2007.
[27] Ashton N, Revell A, Poletto R. Grey-area mitigation for the Ahmed car body using embedded DDES. In: Progress in Hybrid RANS-LES
     Modelling. Notes on Num. Fluid Mech.; 2014,.
[28] Hinterberger C, Garcia-Villalba M, Rodi W. Large eddy simulation of flow around the Ahmed body. In: The Aerodynamics of Heavy
     Vehicles: Trucks, Buses, and Trains; vol. 19 of Lecture notes in applied and computational mechanics. Springer; 2004,.
[29] Minguez M, Pasquetti R, Serre E.       High-order large-eddy simulation of flow over the Ahmed body car model.           Physics of Fluids
     2008;20(9):095101. doi:10.1063/1.2952595.
[30] Krajnovic S, Davidson L. Large-eddy simulation of the flow around simplified car model. In: SAE World Congress. Detroit; 2004,.
[31] Kapadia S, Roy S, Vallero M, Wurtzler K, Forsythe J. Detached-Eddy Simulation over a reference ahmed car model. In: AIAA 41th
     Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. Reno Nevada: AIAA; 2003,.
[32] Guilmineau E, Deng G, Wackers J. Numerical simulation with a DES approach for automotive flows. Journal of Fluids and Structures
     2011;27(5-6):807–16. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2011.03.010. doi:10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2011.03.010.
[33] Archambeau F, Mechitoua N, Sakiz M. A finite volume method for the computation of turbulent incompressible flows - industrial applications.
     Int J Finite Volumes 2004;1:1–62.
[34] Travin A, Shur M, Strelets M, Spalart PR. Physical and numerical upgrades in the detached-eddy simulation of complex turbulent flows. In:
     Proceedings of the 412th Euromech Colloquium on LES and Complex Transitional and Turbulent Flows. Munich; 2000,.
[35] Peters BC, Uddin M, Bain J, Charlotte UNC, Engineering M. Simulating DrivAer with Structured Finite Difference Overset Grids. SAE
     Paper 2015-01-1536 2015;doi:10.4271/2015-01-1536.Copyright.
[36] Guilmineau E. Numerical Simulations of Flow around a Realistic Generic Car Model. SAE International Journal of Passenger Cars -
     Mechanical Systems 2014;7(2):2014–01. URL: http://papers.sae.org/2014-01-0607/. doi:10.4271/2014-01-0607.
[37] Launder BE, Reece GJ, Rodi W. Progress in the development of a Reynolds stress turbulence closure. Journal of Fluid Mechanics
     1975;68:537–66.
[38] Rumsey CL, Jeyapaul E. Pressure-strain and near-wall modeling for two-dimensional separated flows. In: Stanford Summer School. 2009;
     2012,.
[39] Poletto R, Craft T, Revell A. A New Divergence Free Synthetic Eddy Method for the Reproduction of Inlet Flow Conditions for LES. Flow,
     Turbulence and Combustion 2013;:519–39doi:10.1007/s10494-013-9488-2.




                                                                      28
