Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computers & Fluids
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / c o m p fl u i d

Flow over periodic hills – Numerical and experimental study in a wide range
of Reynolds numbers
M. Breuer a,*, N. Peller b, Ch. Rapp b, M. Manhart b
a
b

Lehrstuhl für Strömungsmechanik, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany
Fachgebiet Hydromechanik, Technische Universität München, D-80290 München, Germany

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 4 February 2008
Received in revised form 16 May 2008
Accepted 19 May 2008
Available online 28 May 2008

a b s t r a c t
The paper presents a detailed analysis of the ﬂow over smoothly contoured constrictions in a plane channel. This conﬁguration represents a generic case of a ﬂow separating from a curved surface with welldeﬁned ﬂow conditions which makes it especially suited as benchmark case for computing separated
ﬂows. The hills constrict the channel by about one third of its height and are spaced at a distance of 9
hill heights. This setup follows the investigation of Fröhlich et al. [Fröhlich J, Mellen CP, Rodi W, Temmerman L, Leschziner MA. Highly resolved large-eddy simulation of separated ﬂow in a channel with
streamwise periodic constrictions. J Fluid Mech 2005;526:19–66] and complements it by numerical
and experimental data over a wide range of Reynolds numbers. We present results predicted by direct
numerical simulations (DNS) and highly resolved large-eddy simulations (LES) achieved by two completely independent codes. Furthermore, these numerical results are supported by new experimental
data from PIV measurements. The conﬁguration in the numerical study uses periodic boundary conditions in streamwise and spanwise direction. In the experimental setup periodicity is achieved by an array
of 10 hills in streamwise direction and a large spanwise extent of the channel. The assumption of periodicity in the experiment is checked by the pressure drop between consecutive hill tops and PIV measurements. The focus of this study is twofold: (i) Numerical and experimental data are presented
which can be referred to as reference data for this widely used standard test case. Physical peculiarities
and new ﬁndings of the case under consideration are described and conﬁrmed independently by different
codes and experimental data. Mean velocity and pressure distributions, Reynolds stresses, anisotropyinvariant maps, and instantaneous quantities are shown. (ii) Extending previous studies the ﬂow over
periodic hills is investigated in the wide range of Reynolds numbers covering 100 6 Re 6 10; 595. Starting
at very low Re the evolution and existence of physical phenomena such as a tiny recirculation region at
the hill crest are documented. The limit to steady laminar ﬂow as well as the transition to a fully turbulent ﬂow stage are presented. For 700 6 Re 6 10; 595 turbulent statistics are analyzed in detail. Carefully,
undertaken DNS and LES predictions as well as cross-checking between different numerical and experimental results build the framework for physical investigations on the ﬂow behavior. New interesting features of the ﬂow were found.
Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
1.1. Case deﬁnition
The prediction of ﬂow separation from curved surfaces and subsequent reattachment is complicated by several phenomena
including irregular movement of the separation and reattachment
lines in space and time, strong interactions with the outer ﬂow,
transition from a boundary layer type of ﬂow to a separated shear
layer with failure of the law-of-the wall and standard model
assumptions for either attached ﬂows or free shear layers. The
* Corresponding author. Fax: +49 9131 852 9579.
E-mail addresses: mbreuer@lstm.uni-erlangen.de (M. Breuer), n.peller@bv.
tum.de (N. Peller).
0045-7930/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.compﬂuid.2008.05.002

improvement of ﬂow prediction by Reynolds-averaged Navier–
Stokes (RANS) simulation or large-eddy simulation (LES) in such
ﬂows is dependent on reliable data of generic test cases including
the main features of the respective ﬂow phenomena. The ﬂow over
periodically arranged hills in a channel as proposed by Mellen et al.
[33] has been used as benchmark test case since it represents welldeﬁned boundary conditions, can be computed at affordable costs
and nevertheless inherits all the features of a ﬂow separating from
a curved surface and reattaching on a ﬂat plate. The geometry of
the test case is shown in Fig. 1. The dimensions of the domain
are Lx ¼ 9:0h, Ly ¼ 3:036h, and Lz ¼ 4:5h, where h denotes the hill
height.
In order to motivate why this case is especially useful for basic
investigations of the performance of turbulence models – not only
subgrid-scale (SGS) models but also statistical models in the RANS

434

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

Fig. 1. Sketch of the ﬂow geometry and snapshot of instantaneous streamwise
velocity at Re ¼ 5600.

context –, and other issues such as wall modeling, the history how
this test case was established is brieﬂy sketched.
Almeida et al. [1,2] experimentally investigated the ﬂow behind
two-dimensional model hills. Two different conﬁgurations were
considered, i.e., the ﬂow over a single hill and the ﬂow over periodic hills. In 1995 these experiments were chosen as the basis of
a test case at the ERCOFTAC/IAHR workshop held in Karlsruhe by
Rodi et al. [42]. In order to select the least demanding conﬁguration, the periodic arrangement without side walls was considered.
However, the calculations carried out for this test case highlighted
a number of serious problems and open questions, see [33]. This
concerns the unknown inﬂuence of the side walls in the experiment not taken into account in the predictions. Since the aspect ratio in the experiment was small (almost square cross-section), it
was expected that the spanwise conﬁnement provoked spanwise
variations. Furthermore, the predictions at the workshop [42] have
cast doubt on the true periodicity of the experimental setup leading to the fact that simulations and experiment were not comparable. Another critical point is the high Reynolds number. Based on
the hill height h and the mean centerline velocity the Reynolds
number was Re ¼ 60; 000. Since the channel height in the experiment was large (Ly ¼ 6:071h), the corresponding Reynolds number
based on Ly is even about six times larger resulting in high computational costs for the conﬁguration chosen. This problem even increases if the single hill case is considered for which suitable
experimental data are available. The unknown effect of the side
walls remains for this case. Therefore, a new conﬁguration was
deﬁned by Mellen et al. [33], which leans on the experimental setup by Almeida et al. [1] but avoids the problems discussed above.
The re-deﬁnition of the test case also allows to meet a number of
desiderata judged to be associated with a good test case for LES studies [33,48]. The ﬂow has to contain the key generic phenomena of
interest, whilst being amenable to a simulation at economically tolerable cost. The new geometry is sketched in Fig. 1. The shape of the
hill is taken from the study of Almeida et al. [1]. An accurate geometric speciﬁcation is available in form of a polynomial ansatz [2].
First, compared with Almeida et al.’s conﬁguration the distance
between two hill crests in streamwise direction was doubled. This
increased distance allows the ﬂow to reattach naturally between
successive hills, providing a signiﬁcant post-reattachment-recovery region on the ﬂat plate between the two hills prior to the reacceleration over the next hill. From the numerical and modeling
point of view this modiﬁcation means that reattachment is now
strongly inﬂuenced by wall modeling, SGS modeling, and grid
arrangement issues. This aspect was not obvious in the original
conﬁguration since reattachment was dictated by the presence of
the windward face of the consecutive hill.
Second, the original channel height was halved. This measure reduces the computational effort and allows a higher aspect ratio Lz =Ly .
Third, the side walls existing in the original experimental setup
of Almeida et al. [1] are removed and instead periodicity in the
spanwise direction is assumed. Based on additional investigations
by Mellen et al. [33] a spanwise extension of the computational domain of Lz ¼ 4:5h was recommended for LES or hybrid LES–RANS
predictions.

Fourth, the Reynolds number was reduced and set to
Re ¼ 10; 595 where Re ¼ U B h=m is based on the hill height h, the bulk
velocity U B taken at the crest of the ﬁrst hill and the kinematic viscosity m of the ﬂuid. Furthermore, the ﬂow is assumed to be periodic
in the streamwise direction which represents a simple way out of
the dilemma to specify appropriate inﬂow boundary conditions
for LES or DNS. For that purpose the increase of the distance between two consecutive hills described above is beneﬁcial too, since
it enhances the streamwise decorrelation. Thus, a well-deﬁned ﬂow
state independent of inﬂow conditions is achieved.
As a consequence the resulting geometrically simple test case
offers a number of important features challenging from the point
of view of turbulence modeling and simulation. The pressure-induced separation takes place from a continuous curved surface
and reattachment is observed at the ﬂat plate (see Fig. 1). Hence,
these ﬂow features are sensitive to numerical and modeling
aspects. Therefore, this conﬁguration was already a test case at
various workshops, e.g., the ERCOFTAC/IAHR/COST Workshops on
Reﬁned Turbulence Modeling in 2001 [22] and 2002 [29], respectively. Consequently, a variety of predicted results using RANS as
well as LES are available which can only be partially cited in the
succeeding section.
1.2. Previous studies
The periodic hill ﬂow test case has been studied so far pursuing
two main objectives, either the modeling and simulation issue or the
physical issue. Regarding the ﬁrst, it is used as a benchmark case to
investigate the ability of RANS and LES to resolve separation from a
curved geometry. Furthermore, the ﬂow is also an interesting case
to study the physical mechanisms of separation on curved surfaces
in more detail.
1.2.1. Modeling and simulation issue
Besides the workshops mentioned above [22,29] a few more
studies on the modeling and simulation issue should be provided
ﬁrst emphasizing on LES. Temmerman and Leschziner [47] investigated the periodic hill ﬂow at Re ¼ 10; 595 using LES. The emphasis
was on the effectiveness of different combinations of subgrid-scale
models and wall functions on relatively coarse grids. The accuracy
was judged by reference to a wall-resolved simulation (lower wall
only) on a grid with about 4.6 million nodes. It was demonstrated
[47] that even gross-ﬂow parameters, such as the length of the separation bubble, are very sensitive to modeling approximations (SGS
and wall models) and the grid quality. A similar investigation was
carried out by Mellen et al. [33] assessing the impact of different
SGS models and the effect of grid reﬁnement. In the succeeding
study by Temmerman et al. [48] the previous efforts of both groups
were combined and a comparative investigation was carried out
applying three grids, six SGS models and eight practices of approximating the near-wall region. Again the coarse-grid simulations
were judged by wall-resolved simulations using the ﬁne grid mentioned above and two independent codes. The simulations on
coarse grids highlighted the outstanding importance of an adequate
streamwise resolution of the ﬂow in the vicinity of the separation
line. The main reason is the high sensitivity of the reattachment position to that of the separation. Furthermore, the near-wall treatment was found to be more inﬂuential on the quality of the
results obtained on coarse grids than the subgrid-scale modeling.
In the meantime several studies used this test case to evaluate
the performance not only for coarse-grid LES predictions but also
for different kinds of hybrid LES–RANS approaches including
detached-eddy simulations (DES), see, e.g. [10,12,14,43]. The latter
for example was a collaborative effort involving ﬁve different ﬂow
solvers used by ﬁve different groups in order to cover a broad range
of numerical methods and implementations. All simulations were

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

conducted on the same grid with approximately one million cells
and compared to a highly resolved LES by Breuer [9]. Overall the
DES predictions and also LES predictions on the same grid were
found to be in good agreement with the reference data. Further
coarsening of the grid did not alter the performance of DES substantially unless the LES–RANS interface moves outside the boundary layer on the crest of the hill. In that situation a massive
deterioration of the results was detected.
To evaluate the performance of wall models for LES of attached
ﬂows the turbulent plane channel ﬂow [25,34] is the standard test
case. That is due to its geometrical simplicity including two homogeneous directions which allow the application of periodic boundary conditions avoiding inﬂow and outﬂow boundary conditions
completely. For the development and investigation of wall models
for separated ﬂows, the channel ﬂow with periodic constrictions
has nearly reached an equivalent status and meaning. Similar to
the plane channel the computational setup of the hill ﬂow is simple
owing to the possibility to apply periodic boundary conditions
twice. However, for the hill case the ﬂow separates from a curved
surface and a large back-ﬂow region emerges. Further downstream
the ﬂow reattaches and is accelerated at the windward side of the
hill. Therefore, the separation and reattachment process can be
studied in detail and wall models developed for attached and separated ﬂows can be evaluated based on this ﬂow.
As mentioned above, Temmerman et al. [48] investigated the
predictive accuracy of different wall models based on this case. It
was clearly shown that the predictions provided by classical wall
models developed for attached ﬂows are not satisfactory if the
wall-nearest computational point is located outside the viscous
sublayer. This renders the case as a sensitive platform to develop
and improve wall models. For example, Manhart et al. [32] used
this ﬂow to evaluate a modiﬁed law of the wall for the viscous sublayer which accounts for the effect of both, the wall shear stress
and the pressure gradient in the streamwise direction which plays
an important role for separated ﬂows. They analyzed the performance of this new formulation based on DNS data of the hill ﬂow
at Re ¼ 5600. In similar investigations Breuer et al. [11,13] developed a new wall modeling strategy for separated ﬂows. It allows
to derive enhanced wall models which also take the streamwise
pressure gradient into account. Moreover, the concept of artiﬁcial
viscosity used for that purpose makes an accurate description of
the physics of the ﬂow in the wall-nearest region possible. Statistical evaluations of highly resolved LES data for the hill ﬂow case
using non-linear stochastic estimation were carried out in order
to determine the important physical dependence involved in the
new wall model, namely the ratio of the thickness of the viscous
sublayer to the height of the wall-nearest cell. The results show
that the enhanced wall model yields reliable predictions for separated ﬂows. The agreement with the reference data was found to
be much better than the results obtained by no-slip boundary conditions or classical wall models such as those by Schumann [44]
and Werner and Wengle [49].

435

features of the ﬂow. Based on that interesting observations such
as the very high level of spanwise velocity ﬂuctuations in the
post-reattachment zone on the windward hill side were explained.
This phenomenon revealed to be a result of the ‘splatting’ of largescale eddies originating from the shear layer and convected downstream towards the windward slope. That explains why RANS simulations even when applying second-moment closures can not
capture the ﬂow ﬁeld accurately. As stated by the authors [18],
the identiﬁcation of other structures by means of structure-identiﬁcation methods turned out to be difﬁcult, mainly because of the
high Reynolds number.
In [12] a preliminary study was carried out in which the
Reynolds number effect was investigated for the ﬁrst time. Interesting ﬂow features such as the variation of the reattachment
length were found. Furthermore, the existence of a tiny recirculation at the foot of the windward face of the hill reported in [18]
was conﬁrmed for Re ¼ 10; 595. That and other ﬁndings motivated
to study the ﬂow under varying Reynolds numbers more deeply.
1.3. Goals and outline of the present study
The objective of the present investigation is concerned with the
physical issue of the periodic hill ﬂow. Compared to the comprehensive study by Fröhlich et al. [18] it differs in a certain number
of aspects. The ﬁrst issue concerns the fundamentals of the investigations which besides two independent numerical simulation
techniques also relies on experimental measurements (PIV) which
were especially carried out for this work recently. The second
important point is the extension to a wide range of Reynolds numbers including the one studied before, for which compared to [18] a
reﬁned simulation including the resolution of the upper wall region was performed. The extension to a broad range of Reynolds
numbers allows one on the one hand to take also direct numerical
simulations into account using grids with up to about a quarter of a
billion grid points. On the other hand the inﬂuence of the Reynolds
number on the statistical data as well as on the dynamical ﬂow
structures could be analyzed in detail. Since the key features of
massively separated ﬂows are assumed to be only weakly dependent on Re, structure-identiﬁcation methods could be applied to
the low-Re cases involved.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2
the experimental setup is described. The computational methodologies and the numerical parameters pertaining to the simulations
reported later are given in Section 3. That includes a thorough analysis of the resolution issue for both grid types applied. Section 4
delivers cross-comparisons between the different numerical
results and the measured data. The inﬂuence of the Reynolds
numbers on statistical as well as structural features of the ﬂow
ﬁeld will be highlighted in Section 5. Conclusions are ﬁnally
presented in Section 6.

2. Experimental setup
1.2.2. Physical issue
Concerning the physical issue a comprehensive investigation for
the periodic hill ﬂow at Re ¼ 10; 595 was carried out by Fröhlich et
al. [18] based on LES predictions with about 4.6 million nodes and
two independent codes. By the arguments given in Section 1.1 and
especially the distinct post-reattachment-recovery region it is justiﬁed why the chosen conﬁguration stands out from the crowd of
investigations on ﬂows over wavy-terrain geometries. A detailed
analysis was carried out including the evaluation of the budgets
for all Reynolds stress components, anisotropy measures, and spectra. The emphasis was on elucidating the turbulence mechanisms
associated with separation, recirculation and acceleration. The statistical data were supported by investigations on the structural

A water channel has been set up to investigate the ﬂow experimentally (see Fig. 2). Water was chosen as its density is 800 times
higher than that of air and its kinematic viscosity is 13 times lower.
At the same model scale and Reynolds number the pressure in
water is 4.5 times higher than in air and therefore easier to determine. The corresponding ratio for the characteristic times is 13.
This issue contributes to higher accuracy especially in instantaneous ﬂows [15]. The water was ﬁltered, decalciﬁed and
chlorinated to avoid disturbances from lime stone and bioﬁlm on
the boundaries of the channel.
A well with a maximum discharge of 70 l/s pumps the water
from a reservoir through a pipe with a diffuser into an intake

436

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

tops can be seen as constant from hill four on. The spanwise pressure distribution on the leeward and windward side of the hill is
constant in the range of accuracy of the pressure cells as well.
2.2. Velocity measurements

Fig. 2. Experimental setup for the ﬂow over periodic hills.

reservoir that damps ﬂuctuations. Several ﬁxtures such as sieves,
air intake ﬁlters and barriers abate the structures evolving from
the entering jet. The rectangular channel which is 3:036h high
and 18h wide is directly attached to the intake reservoir that is
18h wide as well. The dimensions of the model relate to the hill
height h that was chosen to be 50 mm. The wider extend in the
spanwise direction in comparison to the computational domain
was chosen to accomplish homogeneity in the center part of the
channel [40]. The ﬁrst part of the channel that is 10h in length is
followed by round ﬂow straighteners that are approximately
0:44h in diameter and 10h long. A distance of 20h lies between
the ﬂow straighteners and the foot of the ﬁrst hill. In total 10 hills
were chosen to achieve periodicity in the streamwise direction
[40], whereas the measurement section is between hill seven and
eight. A rectangular section of 34h lies between the foot of hill
10 and the outlet reservoir. The water levels in the intake and outlet reservoir determine the pressure gradient and with it the Reynolds number.
The material mainly used is polyvinylchloride. Plexiglas and
glass were chosen for the cover and the walls of the channel at
the measurement section. The hills were cast from polyurethane
in monolithic blocks. The achieved degree of accuracy of the setup
is 6 0:01h.
To check the periodicity in the streamwise direction 19 holes
were drilled into the top cover of the channel at local positions
x=h ¼ 1:3 and x=h ¼ 6:3 (see Fig. 3). They are located one hill height
off the center plane in order not to disturb the PIV measurements
that were carried out in the center. For control of the homogeneity
in the spanwise direction the pressure was recorded at 14 locations
at local positions z=h ¼ 1:2 and z=h ¼ 7:8 at hill eight.

The velocity measurements were conducted with a two-dimensional PIV system. A 190 mJ NdYAG laser emitting 532 nm pulses
was used to generate a light sheet that was 0.7 mm wide. The
images were recorded with a 4 MPx CCD camera. They were
streamed through a RAID system so that 10,000 double frames
could be recorded at a frame rate of 7.25 f/s. The duration of the
experiment corresponds to 335 ﬂow-through times for Re ¼ 5600
and 634 ﬂow-through times for Re ¼ 10; 595, where the ﬂowthrough time is based on the distance between two consecutive
hills and the bulk velocity U B . Laser light reﬂections at the walls
were avoided by adjusting the camera position in the particular
optical axis. Therefore, six camera positions were necessary recording partially overlapping frames with a length/height of 2048 px,
corresponding to 289 mm or 5.79 hill heights (see Fig. 3). The size
of the interrogation areas is 32  32 pixels. They are overlapping
by half of their side length. The spatial resolution corresponds to
Ds ¼ 2:279 mm or 0:046 hill heights. Table 1 shows ratios of the
side length of the interrogation areas Ds and the smallest scales
in the DNS. The Kolmogorov scale gmin was taken from the DNS
using MGLET (see case 8 in Table 3) at Re ¼ 5600 and scaled by
Re3=4 for Re ¼ 10; 595. Since the smallest Kolmogorov length is locally varying, an averaged value denoted gmean provides a more
reasonable estimation on the spatial resolution and thus this ratio
is added in Table 1.
2.2.1. Seeding particles
The puriﬁed water was seeded with hollow glass spheres. The
major advantage of these particles is their dispersion behavior in
water. They do not cluster and bright scattering leads to high-contrast images. The diameters of the spheres range from 8 lm to
12 lm, whereas their density varies from 0.1 g/cm3 to 1.5 g/cm3.
The Stokes number of the particles, deﬁned as

St ¼

tp
tk

with the Kolmogorov time scale

rﬃﬃﬃ
tk ¼

2.1. Pressure measurements
Two pressure cells with an effective range of 1000 Pa and a speciﬁc error of 0.1% were chosen to acquire the pressure drop and the
spanwise pressure distribution. The pressure was recorded relatively to the one on hill crest eight. It was acquired at a sample rate
of 1000 Hz until the change in variance was less than 5  105 .
Instantaneous data could not be evaluated, nevertheless, the mean
values contributed to prove the comparability of the experiment to
the numerical simulations in terms of periodicity and homogeneity
[40]. At Re ¼ 5600 the pressure drops between consecutive hill

Frame 1

ð1Þ

m


ð2Þ

Table 1
Spatial resolution Ds of the PIV measurements with respect to the Kolmogorov scale g
at three different streamwise locations
Re

Ratio

x/h = 0.5

x/h = 1.0

x/h = 6.0

5600
5600
10,595
10,595

Ds =gmin
Ds =gmean
Ds =gmin
Ds =gmean

29.4
17.2
47.5
27.8

26.8
17.5
23.3
28.3

23.4
16.0
37.7
25.8

Frame 2

Frame 3

Pressure holes

3.036
2
1
0
9

0
Hill 6

Frame 4

Hill 7

Frame 5

Frame 6

9
Hill 8

Fig. 3. Measurement section between hill seven and eight.

18
Hill 9

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457
Table 2
Variation of the Reynolds number in the experiment
Nominal Re

Remin

Remax

5600
10,595

5184
10,979

5291
11,144

and the particle time scale,

tp ¼

qp d2p
;
qf 18m

ð3Þ

was calculated to check their behavior in the ﬂow. The maximum
Stokes number as a result of max , the maximum dissipation in the
ﬂow ﬁeld from the DNS using MGLET (see case 8 in Table 3) at
Re ¼ 5600, the greatest particle diameter dp and the highest ratio
of the particle’s and ﬂuid’s density qp =qf is St ¼ 1:32  102  1.
Hence, it can be assumed that the particles follow the ﬂow within
a sufﬁciently short time scale.
2.2.2. PIV algorithm
The minimum intensity image was subtracted from the individual images before the pixel intensity was doubled. The wide intensity distribution leads to high correlation peaks. For saving
computational time cross-correlations have been conducted in
Fourier space, using a so-called ‘Recursive Nyquist Grid’. The velocity vectors were considered as valid if the magnitude of the
streamwise component was within ½0:75U B ; 1:7U B  and the magnitude of the vertical component was within ½0:75U B ; 0:75U B .
Afterwards the vectors were median-ﬁltered, while a deviation of
0:4U B from 3  3 surrounding vectors was tolerated. Skipped vectors were interpolated by means of 5  5 surrounding vectors.
These vectors determine the initial shift of the second frame interrogation areas for the second processing run. After the ﬁnal step
about 1% of the vectors were interpolated.
The post-processing was conducted for data using ﬁrst correlation peak vectors only and for data including also the interpolated
vectors. A comparison of the two differently obtained results
showed no deviations.
2.2.3. Conduction of the experiments
The experimental conditions were controlled through simultaneous temperature and discharge measurements (by a magneto
inductive device, MID) at all times. Slight temperature variations
(6 0:4 K) during the individual experimental runs led to changes
in viscosity by less than 1.0%. The discharge was adjusted by a slide
valve that can only be handled with a certain accuracy. With these
boundary conditions, the Reynolds numbers achieved in the six
individual experimental runs for each Reynolds number varied
slightly as shown in Table 2.
The velocity ﬁelds of the six different frames were merged into
joint proﬁles through integrations of the velocity proﬁles in overlapping parts of the six frames. These factors were counterchecked
with the ratios of mean discharges recorded by the MID. The normalization of the velocities and the Reynolds stresses was done
with respect to U B that was acquired from the integration of the
velocity proﬁle at hill crest seven.
3. Numerical setup: methods and modeling approaches
3.1. Governing equations
For the DNS predictions of the present study we solve the threedimensional, time-dependent Navier–Stokes equations for an
incompressible ﬂuid which reads in its dimensionless form:

oui
¼ 0;
oxi
oui oðui uj Þ
op
1 o2 ui
¼
þ
:
þ
ox
ox
Re
ot
ox2j
j
i

437

ð4Þ
ð5Þ

Here, ui , p and Re are the Cartesian velocity components, the pressure and the Reynolds number, respectively. In the LES predictions
only the large energy-carrying eddies are computed directly
whereas the inﬂuence of the small eddies has to be modeled by a
subgrid-scale model. Consequently, the governing equations (4)
and (5) have to be ﬁltered in space leading to the so-called ﬁltered
Navier–Stokes equations which are similar to the original set of
equations but contain the additional subgrid-scale stress tensor
[8,39]. Its task is to mimic the inﬂuence of the non-resolved
small-scale structures on the resolved large eddies.
3.2. Numerical methodologies
The numerical part of the present study relies on two completely independent codes based on either curvilinear body-ﬁtted
grids with a colocated variable arrangement or Cartesian non-uniform grids using a staggered conﬁguration. The objective is to present highly reliable results obtained by carefully cross-checking
between the outcome of both numerical schemes and additional
experimental data. Afterwards the investigations concentrate on
the physical aspects of the ﬂow considered.
In the following, both codes are described brieﬂy. For a more detailed description we refer to [5–8] for the code LESOCC and
[30,31,35] for the code MGLET. No attempt is made to explain all
advantages and drawbacks of each method which would go beyond the scope of the present paper.
3.2.1. Finite-volume code LESOCC
LESOCC solves the (ﬁltered) Navier–Stokes equations based on a
three-dimensional
ﬁnite-volume
method
for
arbitrary
non-orthogonal and non-staggered block-structured grids (see,
e.g., Fig. 4). The spatial discretization of all ﬂuxes is based on
central differences of second-order accuracy. Time advancement
is performed by a predictor–corrector scheme. A low-storage
multi-stage Runge–Kutta method (three substeps, second-order
accuracy) is applied for integrating the momentum equations in
the predictor step. Within the corrector step the Poisson equation
for the pressure correction is solved implicitly by the incomplete
LU decomposition method of Stone [46]. Explicit time marching
works well for DNS and LES with small time steps which are necessary to resolve turbulence motion in time. In order to ensure
the coupling of pressure and velocity ﬁelds on non-staggered grids,
the momentum interpolation technique of Rhie and Chow [41] is
used. For modeling the non-resolvable subgrid scales, two different
models are implemented, namely the well-known Smagorinsky
model [45] with Van Driest damping near solid walls and the
dynamic approach with a Smagorinsky base model proposed by
Germano et al. [19] and modiﬁed by Lilly [26]. In order to stabilize
the dynamic model, averaging of the numerator and the denominator in the relation for the determination of the Smagorinsky
value [19,26] was carried out in the spanwise homogeneous
direction and also in time using a recursive digital low-pass ﬁlter
[5,8]. The code and the implemented SGS models were validated
on a variety of different test cases. For more information on this
issue, please refer to [5–8].
LESOCC is highly vectorized and additionally parallelized by domain decomposition (see Fig. 4) with explicit message-passing
based on MPI allowing efﬁcient computations especially on vector-parallel machines and SMP clusters. The present simulations
were carried out on the SMP-system Hitachi SR8000-F1, applying
8 nodes (= 64 processors). Related to the usage of a single Hitachi

438

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

y
x
Fig. 4. Cross-section (x–y) of the curvilinear grid; every fourth grid line is shown; thick lines depict block boundaries.

Fig. 5. Cross-section (x–y) of the Cartesian grid; every 15th grid line is shown.

node, the computing time per time step and control volume (CV) is
about 2  106 s.
3.2.2. Finite-volume code MGLET
MGLET is based on a ﬁnite-volume formulation for non-uniform Cartesian grids with a staggered arrangement of the spatially
ﬁltered variables (see, e.g., Fig. 5). The spatial discretization of the
convective and diffusive ﬂuxes is based on second-order central
differences. The momentum equations are advanced in time by a
fractional time stepping using either an explicit second-order central leapfrog scheme (case 51) or a third-order Runge–Kutta scheme
(cases 3 and 8). For the solution of the Poisson equation for the pressure the ‘strongly implicit procedure’ (SIP) by Stone [46] is implemented. For the representation of the hill geometry in the
Cartesian grid an immersed boundary technique is used. All Cartesian cells lying inside the body are excluded from the computation.
The excluded cells are determined by the intersection of the hill
geometry with the Cartesian cells. The geometry of the hills is represented by a triangle mesh. The immersed boundary technique provides a smooth representation of the body surface in the Cartesian
mesh by using third-order least squares interpolation for the interface cells [35]. This method prevents instabilities which are present
in high-order Lagrange interpolation schemes. The code is used for
DNS and LES simulations. It has been shown by several authors that
second-order accuracy can be sufﬁcient for DNS of ﬂows provided
the grid resolution is sufﬁcient [16,17,30].
MGLET is highly vectorized and parallelized by domain decomposition using MPI. The simulations were performed on the Hitachi
SR8000-F1, whereupon the DNS at Re ¼ 2800 used 24 nodes and
the DNS at Re ¼ 5600 used 32 nodes. Related to the usage of a single Hitachi node, the computing time per time step and CV is about
9:6  107 s for the DNS at Re ¼ 5600. For more information on the
code, please refer to [31].

1

Reason: Runge–Kutta scheme not available at that time.

Hence, both codes are relying on the ﬁnite-volume method and
are second-order accurate in space and time. The intrinsic difference is the type of grids used and related to that the representation
of curved or oblique boundaries of the integration domain.
3.3. Boundary conditions and simulation parameters
Since the grid resolution in the vicinity of the wall is sufﬁcient to
resolve the viscous sublayer (see Section 3.4), the no-slip and impermeability boundary condition is used at the wall in both codes. The
ﬂow is assumed to be periodic in the streamwise direction and thus
periodic boundary conditions are applied. Similar to the turbulent
plane channel ﬂow case the non-periodic behavior of the pressure
distribution can be accounted for by adding the mean pressure gradient as a source term to the momentum equation in streamwise
direction. Two alternatives exist. Either the pressure gradient is
ﬁxed which might lead to an unintentional mass ﬂux in the conﬁguration or the mass ﬂux is kept constant which requires to adjust the
mean pressure gradient in time. Since a ﬁxed Reynolds number can
only be guaranteed by a ﬁxed mass ﬂux, the second option is chosen
using the method proposed by Benocci and Pinelli [4].
Furthermore, the ﬂow is assumed to be homogeneous in spanwise direction and periodic boundary conditions are applied, too.
For that purpose the use of an adequate domain size in the spanwise direction is of major importance in order to obtain reliable
and physically reasonable results. To assure this criterion the
two-point correlations in the spanwise direction have to vanish
in the half-width of the domain size chosen. Based on the investigations by Mellen et al. [33] a spanwise extension of the computational domain of Lz ¼ 4:5h is used in all computations presented.
This extension of the domain was also used in the investigation
by Fröhlich et al. [18]. It represents a well-balanced compromise
between spanwise extension and spanwise resolution.
Table 3 summarizes the most important parameters of the simulations available. Ntot denotes the total number of grid points
used; the corresponding number of control volumes is slightly
lower. Although a direct comparison of the number of grid points

439

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457
Table 3
Parameters of the simulations performed
Case

Re

Simulation

N tot =106

1.2
N span

Dt=103

T avg

Code

1

1

700

DNS

13.1

200

0.5

1581

LESOCC

0.8

2
3

1400
1400

DNS
DNS

13.1
20.0

200
132

1.1
1.5

1249
540

LESOCC
MGLET

0.6

4
5

2800
2800

DNS
DNS

13.1
48.0

200
304

2.0
1.0

1249
562

LESOCC
MGLET

6
7
8

5600
5600
5600

DNS
LES
DNS

13.1
13.1
231.0

200
200
404

2.0
2.0
1.0

1214
1303
343

LESOCC
LESOCC
MGLET

9

10,595

LES

13.1

200

1.8

1277

LESOCC

used by LESOCC and MGLET in one x–y plane is not reasonable, at
least the number of points equidistantly distributed in the spanwise direction, N span , can be compared.
The dimensionless time-step size Dt is also tabulated in Table 3,
where the time is normalized by the ratio of the hill height h and
the bulk velocity U B taken at the crest of the hill. To reduce statistical errors due to insufﬁcient sampling to a reasonable minimum,
the ﬂow ﬁeld was averaged in spanwise direction and in time over
a long period of DT avg which is also given in Table 3. Partially, DT avg
covers a time interval of about 140 ﬂow-through times.
3.4. Resolution issues
In this section the choice of grids used in the present study will
be motivated. It is divided into two subsections for the different
numerical methods applied. Nevertheless, similar criteria are used
to determine the appropriate grid design for both numerical
schemes. Satisfying these criteria leads to different restrictions
for both methods which are pointed out in the following. We start
with the curvilinear grid design for the wall-resolved LES prediction at the highest Reynolds number chosen, i.e., Re ¼ 10; 595.
3.4.1. Curvilinear grids
For the simulation at Re ¼ 10; 595 LESOCC applies a curvilinear
block-structured grid consisting of Ntot ¼ 13:1 million grid points
corresponding to a total of about 12.4 million control volumes.
The grid points are clustered in the vicinity of the lower wall, the
upper wall, and the region where the free shear layer appears. Besides classical quality criteria such as orthogonality and smoothness, two main issues motivated the distribution of the grid
points in space. These are the resolution of the near-wall region
and of the inner domain.
To evaluate the ﬁrst concern, the most important quality criterion is the distribution of non-dimensional yþ values deﬁned by
denotes
the distance of the cell center
yþ ¼ Dycc us =m where Dyp
cc ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ﬃ
from the wall and us ¼ sw =q describes the shear stress velocity.
Note that due to the cell-centered variable arrangement Dycc is half
of the corresponding cell height Dy. Fig. 6 depicts the yþ distribution along the lower wall at all Reynolds numbers considered. At
Re ¼ 10; 595 the values are below 0.45 with a mean value of about
0.2 except at the windward side of the hill. Here, the largest values
of the wall shear stress are observed and the yþ value reaches its
maximum of about 1.2. Hence, the lower wall is well resolved.
Regarding the wall-normal resolution the grid satisﬁes the requirements of a wall-resolved LES prediction. Compared to [18] who
employed in their highly resolved simulations a curvilinear grid
with about 4.6 million CVs (196  128  186) especially the number of grid points in the wall-normal direction was increased to
220 in the present investigation. Furthermore, the simulations resolve not only the lower wall (the hills) in more detail but also resolve the upper wall by a DNS-like representation (yþ 6 0:95 at
Re ¼ 10; 595). Thus in contrast to [18] the application of wall func-

LESOCC: LES, Re = 10595
LESOCC: LES, Re = 5600
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 2800
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 1400
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 700

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
0

2

4

6

8

Fig. 6. Distribution of yþ along the lower wall at different Re using LESOCC.

tions is avoided. That allows to establish the inﬂuence of the resolution of the upper wall on the results. To prove the enhanced
resolution, some numbers are provided. For instance, the cell sizes
at the hill crest, which is a key region for the periodic hill ﬂow are
in the current case Dxcrest =h ¼ 0:026 and Dycrest =h ¼ 2:0  103
whereas the corresponding values in [18] are Dxcrest =h ¼ 0:032
and Dycrest =h ¼ 3:3  103 , respectively. Owing to the increased
resolution in streamwise and spanwise direction the cell sizes expressed in wall units are below Dxþ ¼ 20 and Dzþ ¼ 9 and thus
lower than in [18] and substantially lower than the recommendations for wall-resolved LES given by Piomelli and Chasnov [38].
That also holds at the windward slope of the hill where the largest
shear stresses are found.
To evaluate the second concern, the resolution of the inner
region, it is reasonable to estimate the size of the smallest scales
given by the Kolmogorov length g ¼ ðm3 =Þ1=4 . In order to determine this quantity within the wall-resolved LES prediction, the dissipation tensor ij was predicted and averaged in time and in
spanwise direction. It has to be mentioned that this procedure represents only a rough estimate of ij since on the one hand the
diminutive SGS contribution is not included and on the other hand
the present grid might slightly underestimate the dissipation tensor. Based on the dissipation rate  ¼ 1=2ii and the kinematic viscosity m of the ﬂuid, g can be determined and compared to the ﬁlter
width D ¼ ðDx  Dy  DzÞ1=3 applied. In Fig. 7 proﬁles of D=g are
shown at three different locations, x=h ¼ 0:5, 1.0 and 6.0, respectively. With respect to the estimation given by Pope [39] that the
maximum dissipation takes place at a length scale of about 24g,
these structures are resolved by at least 4–5 grid points at
x=h ¼ 0:5. At x=h ¼ 1:0 and 6.0 the maximum of D=g is about 6.3
and thus at least about four times smaller than the decisive scales
found by Pope [39]. Consequently, the grid allows to resolve a

3

x / h = 0.5
x / h = 1.0
x / h = 6.0

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2

3

4

5

6

7

Fig. 7. Proﬁles of D=g at three different vertical positions: x=h ¼ 0:5, 1:0, and 6:0;
curvilinear grid used by LESOCC for the wall-resolved LES prediction at
Re ¼ 10; 595.

440

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

substantial part of the dissipation. Overall the values D=g are smaller than in [18]. Especially, in the vicinity of the upper wall the situation is strongly improved.
As explained above the generation of the grid for LESOCC was
designed for the wall-resolved LES predictions at Re ¼ 10; 595.
Regarding the lower Reynolds numbers considered, the grid was
not modiﬁed when Re was reduced. The reason is twofold. On
the one hand a grid which is sufﬁciently ﬁne for a certain Reynolds
number should also be adequate for a lower Re. That is visible for
example in Fig. 6 which depicts the distributions of yþ along the
lower wall for all Re. The shear stress increases with decreasing
Reynolds numbers, but for ﬁxed U B and h the viscosity also increases with decreasing Re. As a result the average and maximum
yþ values are strongly reduced. Consequently, with decreasing Re
the resolution becomes better and better. Thus by applying the
same grid for the comparison of two Re, the effect of the grid is
completely excluded from the consideration. On the other hand
the intention was to perform DNS predictions for the lowest Reynolds numbers considered, i.e., at Re ¼ 700, 1400, and 2800. Consequently, the grid should be sufﬁciently ﬁne for a DNS at Re ¼ 2800.
That is exactly the Reynolds number in the classical plane channel
ﬂow predictions [25,34] who applied a grid of about 2 million
points. In the present case a six times ﬁner grid is applied which
accounts for the more complex ﬂow ﬁeld and the lower accuracy
of the numerical method. Besides the criteria discussed in detail
above, a further evidence of the adequacy of the grid for DNS at
Re 6 2800 is provided by two simulations carried out at
Re ¼ 5600 (see Table 3). One simulation was done as a wall-resolved LES using the dynamic SGS model (case 7) and the other
was carried out without a subgrid-scale model (case 6). As will
be discussed below, only marginal deviations were found between
both cases. That is a clear hint that for the further reduced Reynolds numbers Re 6 2800 the grid used delivers results which
can be regarded as DNS.
In accordance with [18] the simulation at Re ¼ 10; 595 (case 9)
was performed with the dynamic Smagorinsky model. Owing to
the increased resolution the ratio of mt =m found in the present prediction is smaller than in the previous study. Moreover, by applying two different SGS models which delivered strongly differing
eddy-viscosity values, Fröhlich et al. [18] have shown that the
inﬂuence of this deviation on the LES prediction is low if a very ﬁne
grid is used as in the present case. That conﬁrms that the present
simulation is not materially inferior to a DNS near the walls.
Besides, for some additional simulations at very low Reynolds
number between 100 and 700 to be discussed in Section 5.5, a
coarser grid with 164  100  64 CVs was used.

3.4.2. Cartesian grids
Also for the Cartesian grid used by MGLET the Kolmogorov
scale in the domain and the resolution at the wall based on the
wall shear stress are the most important criteria. Additional criteria have been established for the immersed boundary method. A
ﬁrst evaluation of these criteria has been obtained by preliminary
simulations with relatively coarse grids. The ﬁnally computed values then conﬁrmed these resolution estimations [36].
For the DNS at Re ¼ 2800 (case 5) the grid is reﬁned by geometric stretching in y-direction close to the hill surface where strong
gradients must be resolved. The stretching factors are kept below
3%. Due to the Cartesian grid the reﬁnement in y-direction is not
exactly wall normal at all positions of the geometry. The grid spacings in streamwise and spanwise direction are equidistant. The
simulation yields 48 million grid points.
For the DNS at Re ¼ 5600 (case 8) the mesh is additionally
stretched in x-direction. It is reﬁned more closely according to
the average wall shear stress at the bottom wall. Fig. 8 shows a
plot of the grid spacings in x- and y-direction as well as the
þ
wall-normal distance of the pressure cell center d from the
þ
geometry. d is a measure to check the variation in the distance
of grid points, which exists in immersed boundaries. If the variation is bounded as observed in Fig. 8, the body surface is well resolved even when it is not grid aligned. Determining the grid
spacing and stretching is an iterative procedure in order to minimize the amount of grid cells used, because for Cartesian grids
small grid spacing leads to a large number of grid points also in
regions where it is not needed. Therefore, it is important to reduce
the number of grid points by stretching at positions with low wall
shear stress and condensing the number of grid points at locations
þ
with high wall shear stress. The wall-normal distance d should
þ
remain at (or below) d  1 over the complete domain (see Fig.
8). The stretching factor is also required to stay below 3% for
the DNS.
The resulting grid spacing with respect to the Kolmogorov
length scale D=g can be seen in Fig. 9 for the same three representative positions as discussed in the section about the curvilinear
grid. The inner domain is well resolved and the grid spacing does
not exceed 2.2 times the Kolmogorov length scale. This also resolves scales well beyond the maximum dissipation rate at 24g
as stated by Pope [39]. As it is known that the smallest scales exist
in the turbulent boundary layer, Fig. 9 shows that the grid stretching compensates for the decrease in Kolmogorov length scale. The
ratio D=g remains small at the wall.
Stretching and condensing the grid in x- and y-direction also
effects the aspect ratio of the cells. For the DNS prediction
(case 8) the aspect ratio Dx=Dy is depicted in Fig. 8. It varies over

9

aspect-ratio
Δx++
Δy+
d

8

Δx+; Δy+; d+

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

x/h
Fig. 8. Properties of the grid used by MGLET for the DNS prediction at Re ¼ 5600 (case 8). Shown are grid spacings in wall units for x- and y-direction. Aspect ratio Dx=Dy and
þ
resulting distance d in wall units are plotted.

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

3

with case 8 providing numerical data on an extremely ﬁne Cartesian grid (231 million grid points) which based on the outcome
of Section 3.4 is beyond all doubt a well-resolved DNS. The crosscomparison was also conducted for Re ¼ 1400. However, since no
new ﬁndings compared to the outcome presented in the following
sections resulted, for the sake of brevity this Reynolds number is
omitted here.

x / h = 0.5
x / h = 1.0
x / h = 6.0

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

441

2

2.2

Fig. 9. Proﬁles of D=g at three different vertical positions: x=h ¼ 0:5, 1:0, and 6:0;
Cartesian grid used by MGLET for the DNS prediction at Re ¼ 5600 (case 8).

the domain length since the grid stretching in x- and y-direction is
adapted to the regions of high wall shear stress.
This leads to an optimization procedure for the grid generation
in Cartesian meshes with immersed boundaries. It consists of four
þ
criteria: (i) Keeping the absolute wall-normal distance at d  1,
(ii) the stretching ratio at  3%, (iii) the aspect ratio below 9 and
(iv) assuring small grid spacings in relation to the Kolmogorov
length scale in the entire domain. Applying these criteria the
DNS grid (case 8) yields 231 million grid points.
With the same optimization procedure the grid for the DNS at
Re ¼ 1400 (case 3) is designed. Considering the lower Reynolds
number, less points are needed and the grid consists of 20 million
grid points.
4. Cross-comparison of results
4.1. Numerical results at Re = 2800 and 5600
Before investigating the ﬂow physics and working out the inﬂuence of the Reynolds number, a cross-comparison of the results
achieved by the different methods is carried out. For that purpose
two different Reynolds numbers will be considered. According to
Table 3 two DNS predictions are available at Re ¼ 2800. Case 4
was performed by LESOCC using a curvilinear grid and case 5 is
based on MGLET using a Cartesian grid with about 3.5 times more
grid points. At Re ¼ 5600 case 7 is taken into account which
denotes a wall-resolved LES prediction on the curvilinear grid. On
the same grid a simulation without any SGS model was carried out
(see case 6 in Table 3). However, the deviations found between
cases 6 and 7 are marginal. This outcome is consistent with the
very low eddy viscosities observed in case 7 which demonstrate
that the resolution is nearly sufﬁcient for a DNS (mt =m < 0:5 for
nearly all grid points of the instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld). Nevertheless,
as a matter of conﬁdence the wall-resolved LES prediction (case 7)
is preferred for the cross-comparison. These results are compared

4.1.1. Global view of the ﬂow
A global view of the ﬂow from the DNS at Re ¼ 5600 is given by
the streamlines plot of the averaged ﬂow ﬁeld in Fig. 10 (case 8,
Table 3). The ﬂow separates at the hill crest at x=h  0:18 and forms
a large separation bubble reaching to x=h  5:1. The separation in
this case is not only due to an adverse pressure gradient but also
the result of the strong streamwise curvature of the lower wall.
Fig. 11(a) displays the distribution of the averaged wall shear
stress sw on the lower wall for the cases mentioned above. At both
Re the ﬂow separates shortly behind the hill crest where with
increasing Re the separation point is moving upstream as visible
in Fig. 22. Reattachment takes place about 5.1–5.4 hill heights behind the crest where both codes predict a somewhat larger recirculation length at Re ¼ 2800 compared with Re ¼ 5600. Fig. 22
displaying the separation and reattachment length predicted by
both codes clearly shows that the results are in excellent agreement regarding these integral quantities (see Section 5 for a detailed discussion of this issue).
Downstream of the reattachment region a small recirculation
zone just before the second hill at x=h  7 is found which forms
in all simulations. Along the ascent the wall shear stress strongly
increases and reaches its maximum shortly before the hill crest.
As will be discussed in detail in Section 5, the peak values of sw
strongly increases with decreasing Re. The overall comparison of
sw in Fig. 11(a) shows on the one hand an excellent agreement between the results of both codes at Re ¼ 2800 and 5600 except at
the windward side of the hill. On the other hand the dependence
of the wall shear stress on the Reynolds number can be clearly
appreciated (see Section 5 for a detailed discussion).
The deviations between the predictions of LESOCC and MGLET
observed at the windward side are attributed to the immersed
boundary technique used on the Cartesian grid. It is much more
elaborated to reconstruct the wall shear stress for the immersed
boundary technique than for the curvilinear approach. The body
surface is not aligned with the Cartesian grid and velocity values
or derivatives of velocities, respectively, must be transformed into
the wall-aligned coordinate system. As mentioned in Section 3.4.2
there is a variation in the wall-normal distance when considering
the position of the velocity and pressure variables. In addition to
that the variables are staggered and must be interpolated onto
the same position. These two drawbacks, (i) the variation and (ii)
the staggered arrangement make it difﬁcult to reconstruct the wall
shear stress along oblique walls accurately. However, the deviation
in the wall shear stress does not seem to be an indication for

Fig. 10. Streamlines of the time-averaged ﬂow ﬁeld predicted by DNS at Re ¼ 5600 (case 8, Table 3).

442

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

deﬁciencies in the overall ﬂow ﬁeld. Velocity proﬁles (see Section
4.1.2) at the position of maximum wall shear stress agree well
for the Cartesian and the curvilinear grid.
Finally, Fig. 11(b) depicts the distribution of the averaged pressure along the lower wall. As expected a plateau is observed in the
recirculation region which is longer at Re ¼ 2800 than at Re ¼ 5600
and thus consistent with the reattachment lengths found at both
Re. Similar to sw some small deviations between the simulations
by LESOCC and MGLET are found which are again mainly attributed to difference in the discretization especially along the inclined
slopes. However, since in incompressible ﬂows the pressure distribution shows an elliptic behavior, this discrepancy is already visible in front of the windward side of the hill. A second reason
causing some minor deviations with respect to the maximum of
the averaged pressure occurring at about x=h ¼ 7:8 for Re ¼ 5600
is given by the fact that one simulation represents an LES (case
7) whereas the other is a DNS (case 8). If the SGS model is switched
off as it was done in case 6, the agreement between the results of
LESOCC and MGLET (not shown here) is slightly better with respect to the maximum, thus a small inﬂuence of the SGS model
is present in case 7.

0.03
LESOCC: LES, Re = 5600
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 2800
MGLET : DNS, Re = 5600
MGLET : DNS, Re = 2800

0.02

0.01

Re = 5600

0

Re = 2800
0

2

4

6

8

0.6

LESOCC: LES, Re = 5600
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 2800
MGLET : DNS, Re = 5600
0.4 MGLET : DNS, Re = 2800
0.5

0.3
Re = 5600
0.2
Re = 2800

0.1
0
-0.1
0

2

4

6

8

Fig. 11. Comparison of predictions by LESOCC and MGLET for the averaged wall
shear stress sw and the averaged pressure distribution hpi at the lower wall for two
different Reynolds numbers, i.e., Re ¼ 2800 (cases 4 and 5) and 5600 (cases 7 and 8
in Table 3, respectively).

4.1.2. Averaged velocity and Reynolds stress proﬁles
Fig. 12 shows exemplarily the distribution of the averaged
streamwise velocity hUi=U B at four different vertical positions in
the ﬂow ﬁeld, i.e., x=h ¼ 0:5, 2, 4, and 6. The ﬁrst position is located
shortly after the separation line and crosses the strong shear layer;
the second proﬁle is at the beginning of the ﬂat ﬂoor and hence
within the main recirculation region. The third one is located near
the end of the recirculation bubble and ﬁnally the last is positioned
behind the main separation region in the reattached ﬂow. At both
Re the agreement observed between the results obtained by the
different numerical methods is excellent. Only marginal deviations

3

3

2.5
2.5
2

LESOCC: LES, Re = 5600
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 2800
MGLET: DNS, Re = 5600
MGLET: DNS, Re = 2800

2
1.5
1

1.5

0.5
1
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0
-0.4 -0.2

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.6

0.8

0.8

1

1.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0

0.2

0.4

1

1.2

Fig. 12. Comparison of predictions by LESOCC and MGLET based on the streamwise velocity proﬁles hUi=U B at four different locations (x=h ¼ 0:5, 2, 4, and 6) and two
different Reynolds numbers, i.e., Re ¼ 2800 (cases 4 and 5) and 5600 (cases 7 and 8 in Table 3, respectively).

443

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

3

3

2.5

2.5
LESOCC: Re = 5600
LESOCC: Re = 2800
MGLET: Re = 5600
MGLET: Re = 2800

2
1.5

2
1.5

1

1
Re = 2800

Re = 5600

0.5
0
-0.06

-0.04

-0.02

0.5

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0
-0.1

-0.08

-0.06

-0.04

-0.02

0

0.02

Fig. 13. Comparison of predictions by LESOCC and MGLET based on the normal velocity proﬁles hVi=U B at two different locations (x=h ¼ 2 and 4) and two different Reynolds
numbers, i.e., Re ¼ 2800 (cases 4 and 5) and 5600 (cases 7 and 8 in Table 3, respectively).

are found. For example, MGLET predicts slightly larger back-ﬂow
velocities at x=h ¼ 4 for Re ¼ 2800 compared with the data of
LESOCC. This marginal deviation is still visible further downstream
at x=h ¼ 6 close to the lower wall. Besides that the proﬁles resulting from the two independent simulation techniques lie on top of
each other at both Re.
Fig. 13 depicts the distribution of the averaged normal velocity
hVi=U B at two locations in the middle and near the end of the recirculation bubble, i.e., x=h ¼ 2, and 4. To evaluate this quantity it has
to be taken into account that the normal velocity hVi is about a factor of 20 (x=h ¼ 2) or 10 (x=h ¼ 4) smaller than the streamwise
velocity hUi, respectively. At both Reynolds number the agreement

3

between the predictions by MGLET and LESOCC is extremely good.
Small deviations are visible near the extrema, especially at x=h ¼ 4.
However, expressed in terms of the bulk velocity U B the maximum
deviation of hVi=U B is about 0.4% and hence acceptable.
Furthermore, Figs. 14–16 display the resolved Reynolds stresses
hu0 u0 i=U 2B , hv0 v0 i=U 2B , and hu0 v0 i=U 2B at the same locations as in Fig. 13.
The two main observations are as follows: First, a clear trend is
obvious concerning the variation of the Reynolds stresses with
varying Reynolds numbers. This issue will be addressed in detail
in Section 5. Second, a reasonable agreement is found between
the predictions based on the two different codes at both Re. Similar
to the normal velocity component hVi small deviations are visible

3
LESOCC: Re = 5600
LESOCC: Re = 2800
MGLET: Re = 5600
MGLET: Re = 2800

2.5
2

2.5
2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
0

0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09

0

0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09

Fig. 14. Comparison of predictions by LESOCC and MGLET based on the normal Reynolds stress hu0 u0 i=U 2B at two different locations (x=h ¼ 2 and 4) and two different
Reynolds numbers, i.e., Re ¼ 2800 (cases 4 and 5) and 5600 (cases 7 and 8 in Table 3, respectively).

3

3

LESOCC: LES, Re = 5600
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 2800
MGLET: DNS, Re = 5600
MGLET: DNS, Re = 2800

2.5
2

2.5
2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

Fig. 15. Comparison of predictions by LESOCC and MGLET based on the normal Reynolds stress hv0 v0 i=U 2B at two different locations (x=h ¼ 2 and 4) and two different Reynolds
numbers, i.e., Re ¼ 2800 (cases 4 and 5) and 5600 (cases 7 and 8 in Table 3, respectively).

444

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

3

3

LESOCC: LES, Re = 5600
LESOCC: DNS, Re = 2800
MGLET: DNS, Re = 5600
MGLET: DNS, Re = 2800

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
-0.04

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0
-0.03

0

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

Fig. 16. Comparison of predictions by LESOCC and MGLET based on the shear stress hu0 v0 i=U 2B at two different locations (x=h ¼ 2 and 4) and two different Reynolds numbers,
i.e., Re ¼ 2800 (cases 4 and 5) and 5600 (cases 7 and 8 in Table 3, respectively).

near the extrema occurring in the free shear layer. Except in this
narrow region the normal stresses and the shear stress belonging
to a certain Re agree satisfactorily. The extremely well-resolved
prediction by MGLET at Re ¼ 5600 (case 8 in Table 3) shows the
largest peak values for hu0 u0 i=U 2B . The extrema of the normal stress
hv0 v0 i=U 2B as well as the shear stress hu0 v0 i=U 2B in the shear layer
(x=h ¼ 2) are also slightly larger than the results predicted by
LESOCC (case 7). The deviations found at this Reynolds number
can be explained by the fact that the last is an LES prediction
whereas MGLET provides DNS data. The modeled stress contributions, although known to be small, are not taken into account in
the LES data at Re ¼ 5600 in Figs. 14–16.
4.2. Numerical results at Re = 10,595
Furthermore, the wall-resolved LES prediction by LESOCC
(case 9) is compared with literature data [18]. For this comparison
3

one should bear in mind that both simulations are based on similar
numerical techniques (second-order accurate in space and time
using curvilinear grids), but the main issues from Section 3.4 about
the resolution should be recapitulated. The present grid consists of
about three times more grid points than that used in [18] whereby
the increased number of points is especially applied in the wallnormal direction to resolve also the upper wall and thus to avoid
wall functions.
Fig. 17 depicts a comparison at three different locations
(x=h ¼ 0:5, 2, and 6) showing averaged velocity proﬁles for hUi=U B
and hVi=U B as well as turbulent quantities such as the resolved turbulent kinetic energy hki=U 2B ¼ 0:5ðhu0 u0 i þ hv0 v0 i þ hw0 w0 iÞ=U 2B and
the shear stress hu0 v0 i=U 2B . For the streamwise velocity component
hUi=U B it is obvious that a very good agreement can be observed
in the lower part of the computational domain close to the lower
wall. Solely in the vicinity of the upper wall deviations are visible
which can be assigned to the application of wall functions in [18].
3

2.5

2.5

LESOCC: Re = 10,595

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

3

0
-0.06

-0.04

-0.02

0

0.02

0.04

-0.01

0

0.06

3

2.5

2.5

LESOCC: Re = 10,595

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

-0.03

-0.02

Fig. 17. Comparison of LES predictions by LESOCC at Re ¼ 10; 595 (case 9 in Table 3) and literature data [18] at three different locations (x=h ¼ 0:5, 2, and 6): (a) streamwise
velocity hUi=U B ; (b) normal velocity hVi=U B ; (c) resolved turbulent kinetic energy hki=U 2B ; (d) resolved shear stress hu0 v0 i=U 2B .

445

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

The streamwise velocity component hUi=U B is underpredicted here
and shows a non-smooth behavior. The resolution was quite coarse
in that case in [18] partially leading to wiggles in the solution as
obvious in Fig. 17(b) for the wall-normal velocity component
hVi=U B . The deﬁcits resulting from the usage of wall functions at
the upper wall are also detectable in the turbulent quantities, e.g.,
the location of the peak value of hki=U 2B is shifted away from the
upper wall and the shear stress proﬁle hu0 v0 i=U 2B strongly deviates
from the wall-resolved LES prediction (case 9) in this region. Since
the total mass ﬂux through the channel was ﬁxed, the underprediction of hUi=U B in the vicinity of the upper wall has a certain inﬂuence
on the overall ﬂow development. Nevertheless, the agreement
between the present wall-resolved LES prediction (case 9) and
the literature data [18] is satisfactory and further validates the
former.
4.3. Comparison between experimental and numerical results at Re
= 5600 and 10,595
Finally, the experimental data at two different Reynolds numbers (Re ¼ 5600 and 10,595) are compared with the most accurate
predictions. At Re ¼ 5600 the DNS data achieved by MGLET (case 8
in Table 3) are taken into account, whereas at Re ¼ 10; 595 the
highly resolved LES carried out by LESOCC (case 9 in Table 3) is
considered. Fig. 18 depicts averaged velocity proﬁles for hUi=U B
and hVi=U B at four streamwise positions of x=h ¼ 0:5, 2, 4, and 6.
Regarding the mean streamwise velocity hUi=U B the agreement between predictions and measurements is very good for both Reynolds numbers. Minor deviations are solely visible in the region
of the shear layer where the measurements show slightly higher
velocities and in the post-reattachment region where the experimental data exhibit a faster recovery. As observed before, the vertical velocity component hVi=U B is about one order of magnitude
smaller than the streamwise component and thus more sensitive.

3
2.5
2
1.5

Nevertheless, the match between experiments and simulations is
fully satisfactory. The largest deviations are found at x=h ¼ 2,
whereas all other proﬁles exhibit a closer agreement. It should
be noted here that regarding the minor deviations found the same
trend is observed for both Re independent of the simulation method applied which indicates some systematic reason for this
behavior.
Furthermore, the measurements and predictions should be
compared with respect to the Reynolds stresses. In the following
the experimental data at Re ¼ 10; 595 are taken into account and
compared to the LES prediction (case 9, see Table 3). For that purpose, Fig. 19 displays the three measured components of the
Reynolds stress tensor at three different locations (x=h ¼ 0:5, 2,
and 6). Looking at the streamwise Reynolds stress (Fig. 19(a)),
the measured and predicted data are found to be in close agreement at x=h ¼ 0:5 and 2. Solely in the post-reattachment region
at x=h ¼ 6 the measured peak values of hu0 u0 i=U 2B are at most 10%
higher than in the predictions. Nevertheless, the location of the
peak values and the distributions itself are in close accordance
with the predictions. The vertical Reynolds stress hv0 v0 i=U 2B
depicted in Fig. 19(b) shows even a better agreement than the
streamwise component. In case of the Reynolds shear stress
hu0 v0 i=U 2B (Fig. 19(c)) the deviations observed are of similar magnitude as for the vertical component. Nevertheless, the agreement
between the PIV measurement and the LES prediction is highly
satisfactory.
During the measurements it was found that the determination
of the stresses is getting more and more challenging with decreasing Re. For the case of Re ¼ 5600 it leads to the outcome that the
proﬁles of the Reynolds stresses are similarly shaped, but the
experimentally determined stresses exceed the numerical ones
(case 8 in Table 3) systematically. Pump ﬂuctuations were considered to be the reason for that, but high-pass ﬁltering excluded this
cause.

3
2.5

MGLET: Re = 5600
Exp., x/h = .5
Exp., x/h = 2.
Exp.: x/h = 4.
Exp.: x/h = 6.

2
1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

3
2.5
2
1.5

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

3
2.5

LESOCC: Re = 10,595
Exp., x/h = .5
Exp., x/h = 2.
Exp., x/h = 4.
Exp., x/h = 6.

2
1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

Fig. 18. Comparison of measurements and predictions (case 8 for Re ¼ 5600 and case 9 for Re ¼ 10; 595, see Table 3) at four different locations (x=h ¼ 0:5, 2, 4, and 6): (a)
hUi=U B at Re ¼ 5600; (b) hVi=U B at Re ¼ 5600; (c) hUi=U B at Re ¼ 10; 595; (d) hVi=U B at Re ¼ 10; 595.

446

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

3

3
LESOCC: Re = 10,595
Exp., x/h = .5
Exp., x/h = 2.
Exp., x/h = 6.

2.5
2

2.5
2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.04

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

Fig. 19. Comparison of measurements and predictions (case 9, see Table 3) for Re ¼ 10; 595, at three different locations x=h ¼ 0:5, 2, and 6.

In conclusion, the variety of cross-comparisons carried out have
demonstrated that the predicted data are reliable.
5. Inﬂuence of the Reynolds number
After the extensive validations carried out in the previous sections (i.e., CFD vs. CFD, CFD vs. literature, CFD vs. experiment), in
the following the ﬂow over periodic hills will be investigated in
wide range of Reynolds numbers, i.e., 100 6 Re 6 10; 595. Based
on this series of simulations, some peculiar features of the ﬂow
ﬁeld become evident. Here, the evolution and existence of physical
phenomena with respect to the Reynolds number is documented.
The investigation starts with an overview over the global ﬂow ﬁeld
based on averaged integral quantities such as the wall shear stress
and pressure distribution along the lower wall. Then the ﬂow
development is studied based on the averaged ﬂow ﬁeld and the
distribution of the Reynolds stresses leading to an investigation
on the anisotropy of the ﬂow. Furthermore, the length scales occurring at varying Re will be analyzed. Finally, the instantaneous dynamic behavior of the ﬂow will be considered which will shed
more light onto the ﬂow structures and mechanism involved.
5.1. Global averaged properties

Fig. 20. Comparison of averaged streamwise velocity hUi=U B and streamlines at
two different Reynolds numbers (Re ¼ 700 and 10,595).

A global view of the ﬂow for the lowest as well as the highest
Reynolds number investigated is given by the distribution of the
averaged streamwise velocity hUi=U B and the streamlines of the
averaged ﬂow in Fig. 20. Obviously, the ﬂow ﬁeld does not change
dramatically within this Re range. The recirculation bubble at
Re ¼ 10; 595 is smaller and slightly thinner than at Re ¼ 700. Furthermore, the back-ﬂow velocity increases with increasing Re. It
is noteworthy to recall that at Re ¼ 700 the plane channel ﬂow
without constrictions would deﬁnitely be in the laminar regime
what is unambiguously not the case here.

Fig. 21(a) displays the distribution of the wall shear stress sw on
the lower wall for all Reynolds numbers. Based on this comparison
of the DNS and the well-resolved LES predictions, the dependence
of sw on Re can be clearly appreciated.
The ﬁrst observation is that the peak values of sw strongly increase with decreasing Re. That is obvious for the values found at
the hill crest (x=h ¼ 0), the minimum in the recirculation region
(x=h  2—5), and the maximum at the shoulder of the second hill
(x=h  8:6). The increase is monotonous but non-linear with Re.

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

0.05

LES, Re = 10595
LES, Re = 5600
DNS, Re = 2800
DNS, Re = 1400
DNS, Re = 700

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

Re = 10595

0

Re = 700

-0.01
0

2

4

6

8

0.4

0.2
LES, Re = 10595
LES, Re = 5600
DNS, Re = 2800
DNS, Re = 1400
DNS, Re = 700

0

-0.2
0

2

4

6

8

Fig. 21. Distribution of the averaged wall shear stress sw and the averaged pressure
distribution hpi along the lower wall for ﬁve different Reynolds numbers,
predictions by LESOCC.

In order to understand this behavior, two contrary effects have to
be considered playing an important role. Based on the deﬁnition
of the wall shear stress sw ¼ loV parallel =on it is on the one hand
obvious that sw increases with decreasing Re since for ﬁxed U B
and h the viscosity has to increase. On the other hand the velocity
gradient at the wall is decreasing when Re is reduced as will be
shown in the next section. Thus both opposite inﬂuences are
superimposed yielding this non-linear behavior.
The ﬂow separates shortly behind the hill crest at all Re. As
shown in Fig. 22 the separation point moves upstream from
xS =h  0:45 at Re ¼ 100 to xS =h  0:3 at Re ¼ 700 and ﬁnally to
xS =h  0:18 at Re ¼ 5600 but then settles down at a slightly larger

6

0.45
LESOCC
LESOCC
MGLET
MGLET

0.4

447

value of xS =h  0:19 at Re ¼ 10; 595. The undulations in the wall
shear stress at the beginning of the main recirculation bubble seem
to be geometry related and not much affected by Reynolds number
effects. This statement is supported by the observation that the
undulations are visible in all simulations using LESOCC but also
for the predictions based on MGLET (compare Fig. 11(a)).
Past the hill the main recirculation region follows with a nearly
constant pressure plateau in a large part of the separation bubble
(Fig. 21(b)). The reattachment position xR =h displayed in Fig. 22 decreases from Re ¼ 100 to 1400. Between Re ¼ 1400 and Re ¼ 2800 a
sudden change can be observed in Fig. 22. The reattachment length
xR =h increases again in this narrow Re-range. Afterwards, a clear
trend concerning the reattachment length is visible for Re P 2800
where xR =h decreases again with increasing Re. Since this phenomenon is consistently predicted by both independent codes, it is assumed to be no numerical artifact. The corresponding values of
the reattachment lengths are xR =h ¼ 5:24; 5:19; 5:41; 5:09, and
4.69 for Re ¼ 700 to 10,595, respectively. A similar behavior of the
reattachment length with increasing Re has been observed for the
backward-facing step ﬂow by Armaly et al. [3]. This observation also
explains why with increasing Re there is no continuous trend visible
for the averaged pressure distribution depicted in Fig. 21(b).
Interestingly, a small region with positive averaged wall shear
stress is found within the main separation bubble at Re ¼ 1400
by both codes (case 2 and 3). That leads to a tiny counterclockwise
rotating structure in the region x=h  0:6–0.8 at the falling edge of
the hill which is depicted in Fig. 23. Contrarily, at the higher Re
numbers sw is negative in the entire recirculation region and thus
no such tiny structure is detected. This special feature solely
observed at Re ¼ 1400 might be an explanation for the non-monotonous behavior of the reattachment length xR =h. However, the
interpretation has to be done with care, since one has to bear in
mind that the data presented are averaged in time and in homogeneous direction. Animations of the ﬂow ﬁeld at the low Reynolds
number cases have clearly shown that along the falling edge of
the hill intermittently attached ﬂow regions can be detected which
explain the positive wall shear stress.
In the post-reattachment zone a tiny recirculation region is detected in front of the second hill at x=h  7:0—7:4. This feature is
found for all Re > 200 investigated, but again the largest extension
of this structure is observed at Re ¼ 2800 (see Fig. 24). On the
windward side of the second hill the ﬂow is strongly accelerated
(see also Fig. 21(b) for the pressure distribution) leading to a distinctive peak of sw shortly before the hill crest at x=h  8:6. The
peak value of sw signiﬁcantly increases with decreasing Re. Downstream of that position the pressure gradient suddenly changes
from favorable to adverse yielding a strong drop of the wall shear
stress between x=h  8:6—9:0 for all Re. At the hill crest, just before

5.75
5.5

0.35

x /h

xS /h

R

5.25

0.3
Reattachment

5

0.25
4.75
0.2

Separation

0

5000

1000 0

4.5

Re
Fig. 22. Separation length and reattachment length vs. Reynolds number; comparison of predictions by LESOCC and MGLET (values for Re < 700 are based on coarsegrid simulation mentioned in Section 5.5).

Fig. 23. Tiny bubble with positive averaged wall shear stress found within the main
recirculation region at the falling edge of the hill at Re ¼ 1400 visualized by the
averaged streamwise velocity hUi=U B and streamlines.

448

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

Fig. 24. Tiny recirculation bubble in front of the second hill at Re ¼ 2800 visualized
by the averaged streamwise velocity hUi=U B and streamlines.

wall shear stress with increasing Re deﬁnitely supports this observation. Furthermore, an additional simulation at Re ¼ 22; 400 (not
shown here) assists the decreasing sw at x=h  0 and thus delivers
further evidence. It should be noted in this context that right on
the hill crest the boundary is ﬂat.
An explanation for this tiny recirculation zone in the averaged
ﬂow ﬁeld can be found in the instantaneous data. Irregularly the
ﬂow in the vicinity of the hill crest already separates at x=h  8:8
generating additional eddies. These partially strong eddies are
transported downstream and affect the ﬂow supposed to separate
on the curved wall. Therefore, also the separation on the leeward
side is strongly inﬂuenced by the ﬂow phenomena appearing before or at the crest. Since this early separation before the hill crest
is only detected temporarily, it is hardly visible in the averaged
ﬂow ﬁeld.
5.2. Averaged velocity and Reynolds stress proﬁles

the main separation, a tiny recirculation zone forms solely at the
highest Re. This phenomenon was not observed before. It is unlikely that it is an artifact because a clear downwards trend of the

3

In this section certain positions in the ﬂow will be investigated
more closely. For that purpose the mean ﬂow velocities hUi=U B and

3

2.5

2.5

LES, Re = 10595
LES, Re = 5600
DNS, Re = 2800
DNS, Re = 1400
DNS, Re = 700

2

2

1.5

1.5
1

1
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

-0.02

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.07

-0.015

0

0.02

0.01

-0.01

0.04

0.06

0.02

-0.005

0.08

0.1

0.03

0.12

0.04

0

Fig. 25. Proﬁles of the streamwise velocity hUi=U B , the normal velocity hVi=U B , and the resolved Reynolds stresses hu0 u0 i=U 2B , hv0 v0 i=U 2B , hw0 w0 i=U 2B , and hu0 v0 i=U 2B at position
x=h ¼ 0:05 for ﬁve different Reynolds numbers, predictions by LESOCC.

449

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

hVi=U B as well as all non-zero Reynolds stresses are depicted at
four locations, i.e., x=h ¼ 0:05 (close to the hill crest), x=h ¼ 2 (in
the middle of the main recirculation region), x=h ¼ 4 (close to the
end of the main recirculation region), and x=h ¼ 8 (at the windward side of the second hill). The corresponding plots can be found
in Figs. 25–28.
It is visible at all positions shown that on both walls the velocity
gradients of hUi=U B increase with increasing Re and owing to a
ﬁxed mass ﬂow rate the maximum of the streamwise velocity is
decreasing (compare also Fig. 20). The change in the slope can be
seen most clearly at the upper wall. Furthermore, the back-ﬂow
velocity in the middle of the main recirculation region (x=h ¼ 2) increases with increasing Re and overall the recirculation bubble becomes slightly thinner. A clear trend is also obvious for hVi=U B . For
example at x=h ¼ 0:05 the maximum and at x=h ¼ 4 the minimum
signiﬁcantly increase with decreasing Re, respectively.
Concerning the Reynolds stresses the following observations can
be made. At the beginning of the free shear layer at x=h ¼ 0:05 the
peak value of hu0 u0 i=U 2B is strongest at Re ¼ 10; 595, whereas only
about half of the strength is found at Re ¼ 700. The ﬂuctuations in

3

wall-normal direction hv0 v0 i=U 2B are, however, of the same size for
all Re. Since the development of the free shear layer is shifted downstream for decreasing Re (see Fig. 29), similar peak values of
hu0 u0 i=U 2B and hu0 v0 i=U 2B are already observed at x=h ¼ 2 for all Re.
Thus these extrema appearing in the free shear layer are approximately independent of Re. Furthermore, with increasing Re the positions of the extrema are shifted closer to the lower wall which is in
accordance with the thinner recirculation region mentioned above.
The size of the peak values of the two other Reynolds stresses
hv0 v0 i=U 2B and hw0 w0 i=U 2B , however, decrease with decreasing Re.
Another clear trend can be seen for the free shear layer which
broadens with increasing Re. That is obvious in the distribution
of all Reynolds stresses depicted in Fig. 26 at x=h ¼ 2. Moreover,
the peak values of hu0 u0 i=U 2B and hw0 w0 i=U 2B in the vicinity of the
upper wall increase with increasing Re and move closer to the
walls as expected for a turbulent ﬂow in the vicinity of a plane
wall.
Close to the end of the recirculation bubble at x=h ¼ 4 and past
the bubble at x=h ¼ 6 (not shown here) the situation is different.
Here, the peak values of hu0 v0 i=U 2B increase strongly with decreasing

3

2.5

2.5

LES, Re = 10595
LES, Re = 5600
DNS, Re = 2800
DNS, Re = 1400
DNS, Re = 700

2
1.5

2
1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
-0.4 -0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0
-0.06 -0.04 -0.02

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08

0.1

0.03

0.05

0.06

0

0.01

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0

0.01

0
-0.04

-0.03

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0.06

0.02

-0.02

0.04

-0.01

Fig. 26. Proﬁles of the streamwise velocity hUi=U B , the normal velocity hVi=U B , and the resolved Reynolds stresses hu0 u0 i=U 2B , hv0 v0 i=U 2B , hw0 w0 i=U 2B , and hu0 v0 i=U 2B at position
x=h ¼ 2:0 for ﬁve different Reynolds numbers, predictions by LESOCC.

450

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

3

3

2.5

2.5

LES, Re = 10595
LES, Re = 5600
DNS, Re = 2800
DNS, Re = 1400
DNS, Re = 700

2
1.5

2
1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0
-0.14 -0.12 -0.1 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

0.02

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0
-0.04

-0.02

0

0.02

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

Fig. 27. Proﬁles of the streamwise velocity hUi=U B , the normal velocity hVi=U B , and the resolved Reynolds stresses hu0 u0 i=U 2B , hv0 v0 i=U 2B , hw0 w0 i=U 2B , and hu0 v0 i=U 2B at position
x=h ¼ 4:0 for ﬁve different Reynolds numbers, predictions by LESOCC.

Re. Contrarily to x=h ¼ 2 the peak values of all normal Reynolds
stresses at x=h ¼ 4 and 6 also increase with decreasing Re. An
explanation for the opposite behavior found at the different locations can be given based on Fig. 29 which depicts exemplarily
the distribution of the turbulent kinetic energy for the lowest
and the highest Reynolds number investigated. This comparison
clearly shows that the peak values of hki=U 2B are of similar size at
both Re but shifted downstream for the low-Re case compared with
the high-Re case. Thus, lower ﬂuctuations are found for example at
x=h ¼ 2 for Re ¼ 700 compared with Re ¼ 10; 595, whereas further
downstream larger peak values exist for the low-Re ﬂow.
In principle, the same trend as observed at x=h ¼ 4 and 6 can
also be seen at the windward slope of the second hill, i.e., at
x=h ¼ 8. The most interesting feature is here the observation that
the maximum of the spanwise Reynolds stress hw0 w0 i=U 2B in the
vicinity of the wall is nearly independent of the Reynolds number.
As discussed in [18] this phenomenon reveals to be the result of
the ‘splatting’ of large-scale eddies originating from the shear layer
and convected downstream towards the windward slope. Thus, the
distribution of hw0 w0 i=U 2B in Fig. 28(e) delivers a clear hint that the

same mechanism must play an important role also for the lowest
Reynolds number considered. Consequently, the phenomenon
has to be nearly independent of Re. That explains why the distributions of the mean velocities and Reynolds stresses are very similar
close to the windward slope of the second hill at x=h ¼ 8.
5.3. Anisotropy-invariant investigations
Lumley and Newman [27] and Lumley [28] found that the state
of turbulence can be characterized by the amount of anisotropy
that prevails in the ﬂow. The anisotropy of a ﬂow can be derived
from the Reynolds stresses sij ¼ qhui uj i by subtracting the isotropic part from sij and normalizing with sss ¼ qhus us i. This leads to
the non-dimensional anisotropy tensor

aij ¼

hui uj i 1
 dij ;
2hki 3

ð6Þ

with the turbulent kinetic energy hki ¼ 1=2hus us i and the Kronecker
delta dij . The tensor aij has three scalar invariants:

451

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

3

3

2.5

LES, Re = 10595
LES, Re = 5600
DNS, Re = 2800
DNS, Re = 1400
DNS, Re = 700

2
1.5

2.5
2
1.5
1

1

0.5

0.5
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.5

0.5
0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

0.05

0

0.01

0.02

0.03

0.04

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

3

3

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

Fig. 28. Proﬁles of the streamwise velocity hUi=U B , the normal velocity hVi=U B , and the resolved Reynolds stresses hu0 u0 i=U 2B , hv0 v0 i=U 2B , hw0 w0 i=U 2B , and hu0 v0 i=U 2B at position
x=h ¼ 8:0 for ﬁve different Reynolds numbers, predictions by LESOCC.

aii ¼ 0;

II ¼ aij aji ;

III ¼ aij ajk aki :

ð7Þ

By cross-plotting II and III, the state of turbulence in a ﬂow can be
displayed with respect to its anisotropy. If the scalar invariants II
and III are evaluated for the case of a two-component turbulence
(one component of the velocity ﬂuctuations is negligibly small compared with the other two), this leads to II ¼ 2=9 þ 2III. Doing the
same for the axisymmetric turbulence (two components are equal
in magnitude) yields II ¼ 3=2ð4=3jIIIjÞ2=3 . Hence, if these relations
are cross-plotted as done in Fig. 30, they deﬁne a narrow region
called the anisotropy-invariant map. It was shown by Lumley [28]
that all physically realizable turbulence has to lie within this small
region. However, different states of turbulence are represented by
different parts of the map.
The boundaries of the invariant map describe the limiting states
of turbulence [24]. Isotropic turbulence is found at the lower corner point of the map (origin in Fig. 30) where II ¼ III ¼ 0, hence
the anisotropy is zero. The left branch of the map (III < 0) describes
axisymmetric turbulence in which one component of the velocity
ﬂuctuations is smaller than the other two. In the literature, this

is sometimes referred to as ‘pancake’ type of turbulence. The simplest example of this type is the passage of grid turbulence through
axisymmetric contraction. In contrast, the axisymmetric turbulence on the right side (III > 0) is characterized by one ﬂuctuating
component which dominates over the other two. This, for example,
holds for grid turbulence through axisymmetric expansion and is
called ‘cigar’-like turbulence. The remaining boundary line on top
of the map is the limiting case of a two-component turbulence as
it can be found in the direct vicinity of walls. Here, the wall-normal
component of the velocity ﬂuctuations is tending towards zero,
leaving only the wall-parallel components. The corner point on
the left-hand side of the anisotropy-invariant map represents a
turbulence state in which only two ﬂuctuating components of
equal intensity exist called two-component isotropic turbulence.
Finally, the right top end of the map describes one-component turbulence, which consists merely of one ﬂuctuating component.
In order to compare the lowest and the highest Reynolds number regarding the anisotropy of turbulence, Fig. 30 displays the
states of turbulence along four streamwise locations in the ﬂow
ﬁeld, namely x=h ¼ 2, 4, 6, and 8. The points at the upper and lower

452

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

Fig. 29. Comparison of turbulent kinetic energy hki=U 2B at two different Reynolds
numbers (Re ¼ 700 and 10,595).

wall are denoted by ‘U’ and ‘L’, respectively. First, it has to be remarked that taking the entire ﬂow into account all states indeed
lie within the invariant map (not shown here), as it is required
by realizability constraints. Second, as requested, the end points
of the streamwise proﬁles at both walls are found at the two-component limit for both Re. At the upper wall the anisotropy is larger
for Re ¼ 10; 595 than for Re ¼ 700 and thus the U-point at all locations considered is shifted to the right towards the one-component
limit. Contrarily, at the lower wall the L-point is shifted to the left
towards the two-component isotropic limit at Re ¼ 10; 595 in comparison with Re ¼ 700. In the vicinity of the upper wall the wellknown behavior of the invariants for a plane channel ﬂow can be
observed, i.e., progressing along the ‘axisymmetric expansion’ line
in the log-region towards the one-component limit and settling
down at the two-component limit at the wall. The main difference
between both Re is given by larger extrema found at Re ¼ 10; 595.
When approaching the lower wall at x=h ¼ 2 a fundamental deviation is found for both Re. In the high-Re case the approach occurs
mostly along the ‘axisymmetric contraction’ line (III < 0), whereas
for the low-Re case the approach is closer to the ‘axisymmetric
expansion’ line (III > 0). However, looking at the situation further
downstream (x=h ¼ 4) in the region of the main recirculation bubble,
the trace in the anisotropy-invariant map is similar for both Re.

0.4

0.4

0.35
t
nen

0.35

U

po

m
-Co

Tw
U

0.25

U
0.2

L

0.2

L

0

0.1
0.05

Re = 700
Re = 10595
0

ic
etr
mm ion
isy act
Ax ontr
C

0.05

ic
etr n
mm tio
isy rac
Ax ont
C

0.1

L
L

0.15

Ax
i
Ex sym
pa me
ns tri
ion c

0.15

m
-Co

o

II

II

o

Tw

0.25

ent U

pon

0.3

Ax
i
Ex sym
pa me
ns tri
ion c

0.3

Re = 700
Re = 10595

0

0.05

0

0.05

III

III

0.4

0.4

0.35

0.35
t

en
pon
om U
C
o

L

L

U
0.2

L

0.1
Re = 700
Re = 10595

0

0.05

III

0.05
0

ic
etr n
mm tio
isy rac
Ax ont
C

0

ic
etr n
mm tio
isy rac
Ax ont
C

0.05

U

0.15

Ax
i
Ex sym
pa me
ns tri
ion c

0.15
0.1

Tw

0.25

Ax
i
Ex sym
pa me
ns tri
ion c

0.2

m
-Co

o

Tw

0.25

ent L U

pon

0.3

II

II

0.3

Re = 700
Re = 10595
0

0.05

III

Fig. 30. Anisotropy-invariant mapping at four streamwise locations and at two different Reynolds numbers (Re ¼ 700 and 10,595); ‘L’ and ‘U’ denote the end points of the
trace at the lower and upper wall, respectively.

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

453

Fig. 31. Comparison of (instantaneous) vorticity component xz normal to the cross-section at 11 different Reynolds numbers (Re ¼ 100–10,595) at an arbitrarily chosen
instant in time; cases (a)–(f) were computed on a coarser grid as described in Section 5.4.

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

Coming from the area of high anisotropy in the region of the onecomponent limit (vicinity of the upper wall) with decreasing distance to the lower wall the trace in the invariant map ﬁrst progresses
towards the isotropic limit, nestles against the ‘axisymmetric expansion’ line and ﬁnally comes close to the ‘axisymmetric contraction’
line stopping at the two-component limit. As mentioned in [18] this
signiﬁes a behavior very different from that in a log-law layer of an
attached ﬂow. The corresponding end points are at (Re ¼ 10; 595)
or very close to (Re ¼ 700) the left corner point of the anisotropyinvariant map, i.e., the two-component isotropic turbulence.
Basically, the same observation can be also made at x=h ¼ 6.
Thus the qualitative disagreement found at x=h ¼ 2 is again resulting from the delayed development of the ﬂow in streamwise direction at Re ¼ 700 compared with Re ¼ 10; 595 as shown in Fig. 29.
At x=h ¼ 8 the states of turbulence deviate for the upper part of
the computational domain. That is the result of a much thicker
boundary layer for the low-Re case (see Fig. 28). However, close
to the windward side of the second hill where the ﬂow is strongly
accelerated again, the two-component state at the wall itself is approached coming from the ‘axisymmetric expansion’ line (III > 0)
in both cases. That means that one component is dominating over
the other two. Reconsidering the proﬁles of the Reynolds stresses
at x=h ¼ 8 in Fig. 28, it is clear that the spanwise component
hw0 w0 i is substantially larger close to the wall than both other normal Reynolds stresses. That holds for all Re investigated and is a direct result of the ‘splatting’ effect mentioned above. As shown in
[18] for Re ¼ 10; 595, the pressure–strain correlation in the Reynolds stress equation is the major source of gain for hw0 w0 i.
In summary, the anisotropy-invariant map demonstrates that
physically similar observations can be made for both Re. Partially,
the development is shifted downstream for the low-Re case as seen
before leading to disagreements, e.g., at x=h ¼ 2. Nevertheless, in
spite of more pronounced extrema observed for the high-Re case,
the states of turbulence are comparable at both Re.
5.4. Length scales in the ﬂow ﬁeld
Fig. 31 displays a snapshot of the instantaneous vorticity distribution at an arbitrary instant in time at different Reynolds numbers including a series of Reynolds numbers not mentioned
before, i.e., Re ¼ 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600. For these lowRe cases it was not necessary to apply the very ﬁne curvilinear grid
described in Section 3.4.1. Instead, a body-ﬁtted grid with about 1
million CVs (164  100  64) was generated. Comparisons of results obtained on this grid and those of the ﬁne grid at Re ¼ 700
served as an evidence that the coarse grid is sufﬁcient to resolve
all ﬂow features in this Re range.
The series depicted in Fig. 31 clearly demonstrates how the
scales in the ﬂow ﬁeld become smaller with increasing Re. Based
on the well-known relation g=L  Re3=4 for the Kolmogorov length
g describing the smallest length scales in a turbulent ﬂow, the ratio
between the length scales at two different Re can be estimated.
Assuming that the largest scale L restricted by the geometry stays
constant, the maximal ratio of the smallest length scales is about
20 for the instantaneous cases depicted in Fig. 31(b)–(k).
For the low-Re cases the shear layer developing past the hill is distinctively visible followed by the well-known Kelvin–Helmholtz
instability. With increasing Re the region where this instability is observed ﬁrst, moves upstream and comes very close to the hill crest.
Furthermore, a lot of small-scale vortices are visible in this area so
that the origin of the Kelvin–Helmholtz instability is hardly visible.
5.5. Instantaneous dynamics of the ﬂow
Based on the outcome of Sections 5.1–5.4 which showed that
the important ﬂow features are very similar in a wide range of

Reynolds numbers, the idea came up to investigate the dynamics
of the ﬂow ﬁeld ﬁrst at low Reynolds numbers. The objective is
to study the dynamic behavior of the large-scale structures in the
ﬂow which at low Re are not overwhelmed by small-scale eddies.
Thus structure-identiﬁcation methods such as the k2 criterion by
Jeong and Hussain [23] can be applied to the low-Re cases involved.
As mentioned above, for that purpose additional simulations
were carried out at a series of Reynolds numbers in the range
100 6 Re 6 700 using a curvilinear grid with about 1 million CVs.
All simulations were started from scratch with two-dimensional
initial conditions deﬁned by U=U B ¼ 1 (except at the walls) and
V=U B ¼ W=U B ¼ 0.
At the lowest Reynolds number considered, i.e., Re ¼ 100, the
ﬂow is found to reach steady-state after about 100 dimensionless
time units which is equivalent to about 11 ﬂow-through times (see
Fig. 31(a)). The ﬂow separates past the hill crest at about
x=h ¼ 0:45 and forms a large recirculation region which ﬁlls the lower portion of the entire constriction completely. Thus reattachment
is observed in this case at the rising edge of the second hill at about
x=h ¼ 7:73. No three-dimensional structures can be detected.
The situation changes completely when the Reynolds number is
increased to Re ¼ 200 (Fig. 31(b)). Now and for all other higher Re
the ﬂow remains unsteady all the time. Up to about 140 dimensionless time units the ﬂow ﬁeld at Re ¼ 200 is two-dimensional.
However, after this initial phase ﬁrst three-dimensional ﬂow structures develop which are detected by monitoring the spanwise
velocity component W. With increasing Re the initial two-dimensional stage is shortened so that at Re ¼ 700 ﬁrst three-dimensional phenomena can be found at about 50 dimensionless time
units past the initial stage. The corresponding snapshots of the
instantaneous vorticity distribution at an arbitrary instant at all
low-Re cases considered are displayed in Fig. 31(a)–(g).
Fig. 32 displays one-dimensional spectra of the spanwise velocity component W recorded for a point close to the rising slope of
the second hill (x=h ¼ 8:3; y=h ¼ 0:72). The frequency f is normalized by U B and h. Three different Reynolds numbers are taken into
account. At the lowest Reynolds number considered (Re ¼ 200) the
spectrum is already continuous as expected for a turbulent ﬂow.
With increasing Re the spectrum extends towards higher frequencies as visible at the change-over from Re ¼ 200 to 700. This trend
continues for the change-over from Re ¼ 700 to 10,595. Based on
this observation it is clear that the low-Re cases indeed represent
fully turbulent ﬂow ﬁelds deﬁned by a continuous spectrum. In
addition to the analysis of the statistical data carried out in Sections 5.1–5.4, this ﬁnding is an additional evidence why the main
ﬂow features responsible for the dynamic behavior of the ﬂow
are found to be similar.

100000
10000
1000

PSD

454

100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.01

Re = 200
Re = 700
Re = 10,595

0.1

1

10

f
Fig. 32. Spectra of the velocity component W close to the rising slope of the second
hill (x=h ¼ 8:3; y=h ¼ 0:72) for three different Reynolds numbers.

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

455

Fig. 33. Iso-surface of k2 (second eigenvalue of S2 þ X2 , here k2 ¼ 0:1); criterion used for structure identiﬁcation [23]; Re ¼ 200; six different phases in time representing
one ﬂow-through time.

In order to identify characteristic structures in the ﬂow, the
lowest Reynolds number at which the ﬂow is found to be threedimensional and instantaneous is investigated based on structureidentiﬁcation methods [23]. For that purpose Fig. 33 depicts ﬂow
structures at six instants in time which represents an interval of
one ﬂow-through time. Three important ﬂow features have to be
mentioned. On the one hand elongated streamwise structures (denoted A in Fig. 33(a)) inclined to the wall are detected in the vicinity
of the upper plane wall. They show a strong similarity to well-known
streaks and are convected downstream with the mean ﬂow.
On the other hand a variety of structures highly elongated in the
streamwise direction (denoted B) are found close to the concave
wall in front of the second hill. They are either generated by an
instability due to the effect of the centrifugal forces ﬁrst described
by Görtler [20] or the Craik–Leibovich type-2 instability [37]. In the
literature a controversy about the question which of these mechanisms is responsible for the generation of these longitudinal vortices in sheared ﬂows over rigid wavy walls still exists (see, e.g.
[18,21] and the references cited therein) with a tendency towards
the latter. In the present study these vortices are extremely long at
the low-Re case considered. They extend over the hill crest and owing to the periodic boundary conditions applied at least until half
of the succeeding constriction. Similar to the ﬁrst kind of structures
a convective transport takes place in streamwise direction. In an
experimental investigation of a channel ﬂow with a wavy wall
[21], similar streamwise structures were found above the hill crest
for both laminar and turbulent ﬂows. Furthermore, Fröhlich et al.
[18] studied this ﬂow phenomenon in great detail based on their
LES predictions of the periodic hill ﬂow at Re ¼ 10; 595. Although
the identiﬁcation of the structures at this Re is much more difﬁcult

than for the low-Re case taken into account here, the outcome also
supports the present ﬁndings. As expected and demonstrated in
Fig. 31, the length scales in the ﬂow increase with decreasing Reynolds number so that the extension of the structures especially in
streamwise direction are substantially smaller in [18] than for the
case depicted in Fig. 33.
Finally, structures denoted C developing in the region of the free
shear layer (see region of strong vorticity in Fig. 31(b)) have to be
mentioned. They are visible for instance in Fig. 33(e) and are
originally aligned and elongated in spanwise direction. Here, the
well-known Kelvin–Helmholtz instability is responsible for their
generation. With increasing Reynolds number these structures become more and more obvious (see, e.g., vorticity plots in Fig.
31(d)–(f) for Re ¼ 400, 500, and 600). Animations of the ﬂow ﬁeld
over a longer time interval showed that these structures change
their orientation towards the streamwise direction when convected downstream. This phenomenon is perceptible in Fig. 33(a)
which depicts similar structures at a later state, again denoted C.
At this stage oblique structures have already developed which
are mainly elongated in streamwise direction but are still inclined
in spanwise direction.
6. Conclusions
The paper presents a complementary numerical/experimental
investigation2 on the turbulent ﬂow over a periodic arrangement

2
The DNS, LES and experimental data will be published on the ERCOFTAC database,
http://cfd.mace.manchester.ac.uk/ercoftac/.

456

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457

of hills [33] at varying Reynolds numbers in the range
100 6 Re 6 10; 595. A large number of different simulations using
DNS and LES on very ﬁne grids were carried out applying two fully
independent numerical methods. Cross-comparison was done in
three steps. In a ﬁrst step the results of both codes are compared
against each other. Then the predicted data are checked by crosscomparison with data from the literature [18]. Based on both steps
the quality of the present predictions was carefully proven. Besides
this purely numerical assessment in a third step PIV measurements
were performed in a water channel involving 10 hills in streamwise
direction and a large aspect ratio. These experimental data place further conﬁdence on the results presented here.
The results achieved by this complementary study do not only
support prior ﬁndings [18] at Re ¼ 10; 595. Furthermore, the series
of predictions for the broad range of Reynolds numbers considered
shed new light on the ﬂow. In particular, the existence of a small
recirculation at the foot of the windward face of the hill was conﬁrmed for Re ¼ 10; 595 but also exists for 200 < Re < 10; 595. Besides, a tiny recirculation on the hill crest which has not been
discussed before was found which solely exists at the highest Re. This
was possible due to a new LES prediction with increased resolution
supported by a series of DNS at lower Reynolds numbers. These data
also allowed to investigate the behavior of the separation and reattachment length as a function of the Reynolds number. The separation length past the hill crest was found to continuously decrease
with increasing Re until it reaches at minimum at Re ¼ 5600 and
slightly increases again for Re ¼ 10; 595. Even more exciting is the
non-monotonous behavior of the reattachment length, which with
one exception also decreases with increasing Re but shows a local
minimum at Re ¼ 1400. Interestingly, a small counter-rotating ﬂow
structure with positive averaged wall shear stress was detected
within the main recirculation region at the falling edge of the hill between x=h  0:6 and 0:8. This phenomenon is exclusively visible at
this Reynolds number and provides an explanation for the variations
of the reattachment length.
Based on the analysis of the Reynolds stresses and the behavior
of the ﬂow in the anisotropy-invariant map, it is obvious that the
development of the shear layer past the hill crest is delayed and
thus shifted downstream at Re ¼ 700 compared to Re ¼ 10; 595.
If this downstream shift is taken into consideration, similar states
of turbulence can be found at both limiting Reynolds numbers with
more distinctive extrema observed for the high-Re case. The similarity is especially pronounced for the ‘splatting’ phenomenon of
large-scale eddies originating from the shear layer and convected
downstream towards the windward slope as described in [18]. In
this ﬂow region the spanwise velocity ﬂuctuations hw0 w0 i=U 2B show
nearly the same peak values and distribution for all Re studied.
Nevertheless, in the remaining domain clear trends in the distributions of the mean velocities, Reynolds stresses, anisotropies and
the wall shear stresses were found. As mentioned above that led
for example to the observation of the tiny recirculation bubble at
the hill crest at Re ¼ 10; 595.
Furthermore, the length scales appearing in the turbulent ﬂow
ﬁeld at varying Re and the dynamic behavior of the ﬂow were
investigated taking even smaller Reynolds number into account.
At Re ¼ 100 the ﬂow is found to be steady and two-dimensional.
The situation changes completely at Re P 200 for which a threedimensional instantaneous and chaotic ﬂow ﬁeld is observed.
The corresponding spectrum at this and any higher Reynolds number considered comprises a fully continuous spectrum which extends towards higher frequencies with increasing Re. Three main
ﬂow structures can be detected already in the lowest-Re case.
These are streaky structures close to the upper wall, streamwise
vortices close to the concave wall in front of the second hill, and
vortical structures induced by the Kelvin–Helmholtz instability of
the free shear layer.

Acknowledgements
Both numerical projects were ﬁnancially supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft within the French–German programme ‘LES for Complex Flows’ (FOR 507), i.e., BR 1847/8 and Ma
2062/3-3. Additionally, the experimental investigations were supported by DFG, i.e., Ma 2062/7-1. The authors gratefully acknowledge many fruitful discussions with members of this research
programme on this case. The computations were partially carried
out on the German Federal Top-Level Computers Hitachi SR
8000-F1 and SGI ALTIX at LRZ Munich. All kinds of support are
gratefully acknowledged.

References
[1] Almeida GP, Durao DFG, Heitor MV. Wake ﬂows behind two-dimensional
model hills. Exp Thermal Fluid Sci 1993;7:87–101.
[2] Almeida GP, Durao DFG, Heitor MV. ERCOFTACdatabase, classic collection, test
case C18. 2D Model Hill Wake Flows. <http://cfd.me.umist.ac.uk>; 1993.
[3] Armaly BF, Durst F, Pereira JCF, Schönung B. Experimental and theoretical
investigation of backward-facing step ﬂow. J Fluid Mech 1983;127:473–96.
[4] Benocci C, Pinelli A. The role of the forcing term in the large-eddy simulation of
equilibrium channel ﬂow. In: Rodi W, Ganić EN, editors. Engineering
turbulence modeling and experiments 1. Elsevier; 1990. p. 287–96.
[5] Breuer M, Rodi W. Large-eddy simulation of complex turbulent ﬂows of
practical interest. In: Hirschel EH, editor. Flow simulation with highperformance computers II. Notes on
numerical ﬂuid mechanics, vol.
52. Vieweg; 1996. p. 258–74.
[6] Breuer M. Large-eddy simulation of the sub-critical ﬂow past a circular
cylinder: numerical and modeling aspects. Int J Numer Methods Fluids
1998;28:1281–302.
[7] Breuer M. A challenging test case for large-eddy simulation: high Reynolds
number circular cylinder ﬂow. Int J Heat Fluid Flow 2000;21(5):648–54.
[8] Breuer M. Direkte Numerische Simulation und Large-Eddy Simulation
turbulenter Strömungen auf Hochleistungsrechnern, Habilitationsschrift,
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Berichte aus der Strömungstechnik. Shaker;
2002, ISBN: 3-8265-9958-6.
[9] Breuer M. New reference data for the hill ﬂow test case. <http://
www.hy.bv.tum.de/DFG-CNRS/>; 2005.
[10] Breuer M, Jaffrézic B, Šarić S, Jakirlić S, Deng G, Chikhaoui O, et al. Issues in
hybrid LES–RANS and coarse grid LES of separated ﬂows. In: EUROMECH
colloquium 469, large-eddy simulation of complex ﬂows. TU Dresden,
Germany; October 6–8, 2005.
[11] Breuer M, Kniazev B, Abel M. Development of wall models for LES of separated
ﬂows. In: Lamballais E, Friedrich R, Geurts BJ, Métais O, editors. Sixth
international ERCOFTAC workshop on DNS and LES: DLES-6, Poitiers, France,
September 12–14, 2005. ERCOFTAC Series, Direct and Large-Eddy Simulation
VI, vol. 10. New York: Springer Science; 2006. p. 373–80, ISBN-10 1-40204909-9.
[12] Breuer M, Jaffrézic B, Peller N, Manhart M, Fröhlich J, Hinterberger Ch, et al. A
comparative study of the turbulent ﬂow over a periodic arrangement of
smoothly contoured hills. In: Lamballais E, Friedrich R, Geurts BJ, Métais O,
editors. Sixth international ERCOFTAC workshop on DNS and LES: DLES-6,
Poitiers, France, September 12–14, 2005, ERCOFTAC Series. Direct and LargeEddy Simulation VI, vol. 10. New York: Springer Science; 2006. p. 635–42,
ISBN-10 1-4020-4909-9.
[13] Breuer M, Kniazev B, Abel M. Development of wall models for LES of separated
ﬂows using statistical evaluations. Comput Fluids 2007;36(5):817–37.
[14] Breuer M, Jaffrézic B, Arora K. Hybrid LES–RANS technique based on a oneequation near-wall model. J Theor Comput Fluid Dyn 2008;22(3–4):157–87.
[15] Eckelmann H. Einführung in die Strömungsmesstechnik, Leitfaden der
angewandten Mathematik und Mechanik, 74, Teubner; 1997 .
[16] Eggels JGM, Unger F, Weiss MH, Westerweel J, Adrian RJ, Friedrich R, et al. Fully
developed turbulent pipe ﬂow: a comparison between direct numerical
simulation and experiment. J Fluid Mech 1994;268:175–209.
[17] Friedrich R, Hüttl T, Manhart M, Wagner C. Direct numerical simulation of
incompressible turbulent ﬂows. Comput Fluids 2001;30(5):555–79.
[18] Fröhlich J, Mellen CP, Rodi W, Temmerman L, Leschziner MA. Highly resolved
large-eddy simulation of separated ﬂow in a channel with streamwise periodic
constrictions. J Fluid Mech 2005;526:19–66.
[19] Germano M, Piomelli U, Moin P, Cabot WH. A dynamic subgrid-scale eddy
viscosity model. Phys Fluids A 1991;3(7):1760–5.
[20] Görtler H, Über eine dreidimensionale Instabilität laminarer Grenzschichten
an konkaven Wänden. Nachr Ges Wiss Göttingen, Math-Phys Klassse, Neue
Folge I 1940;2:1–26.
[21] Günther A, von Rohr PR. Large-scale structures in a developed ﬂow over a
wavy terrain. J Fluid Mech 2003;478:257–85.
[22] Jakirlić S, Jester-Zürker R, Tropea C. editors. 9th ERCOFTAC/IAHR/COST
workshop on reﬁned ﬂow modeling. Germany: Darmstadt University of
Technology; October 4–5, 2001.

M. Breuer et al. / Computers & Fluids 38 (2009) 433–457
[23] Jeong J, Hussain F. On the identiﬁcation of a vortex. J Fluid Mech
1995;285:69–94.
[24] Jovanović J. Statistical dynamics of turbulence. Springer; 2004.
[25] Kim J, Moin P, Moser RD. Turbulence statistics in fully developed channel ﬂow
at low Reynolds number. J Fluid Mech 1987;177:133–66.
[26] Lilly DK. A proposed modiﬁcation of the Germano subgrid-scale closure
method. Phys Fluids A 1992;4(3):633–5.
[27] Lumley JL, Newman G. The return to isotropy of homogeneous turbulence. J
Fluid Mech 1977;82:161–78.
[28] Lumley JL. Computational modeling of turbulent ﬂows. Adv Appl Mech
1978;18:123–76.
[29] Manceau R, Bonnet JP, Leschziner MA, Menter F, editors. 10th Joint
ERCOFTAC(SIG-15)/IAHR/QNET-CFD workshop on reﬁned ﬂow modeling.
France: Université de Poitiers; October 10–11, 2002.
[30] Manhart M, Friedrich R. DNS of a turbulent boundary layer with separation. Int
J Heat Fluid Flow 2002;23(5):572–81.
[31] Manhart M. A zonal grid algorithm for DNS of turbulent boundary layers.
Comput Fluids 2004;33(3):435–61.
[32] Manhart M, Peller N, Brun C. Near-wall scaling for turbulent boundary layers
with adverse pressure gradient. J Theor Comput Fluid Dyn 2008;22(3–
4):243–60.
[33] Mellen CP, Fröhlich J, Rodi W. Large-eddy simulation of the ﬂow over periodic
hills, In: Deville M, Owens R, editors. Proceedings of 16th IMACS world
congress, Lausanne, Switzerland. CD-ROM; 2000.
[34] Moser RD, Kim J, Mansour NN. Direct numerical simulation of turbulent
channel ﬂow up to Res ¼ 590. Phys Fluids A 1999;11(4):943–5.
[35] Peller N, Le Duc A, Tremblay F, Manhart M. High-order stable interpolations for
immersed boundary methods. Int J Numer Methods Fluids 2006;52:1175–93.
[36] Peller N, Manhart M. Turbulent channel ﬂow with periodic hill constrictions.
Notes on numerical ﬂuid mechanics and multidisciplinary design 92. New
results in numerical and experimental ﬂuid mechanics. Edition V. New York:
Springer; 2006. p. 504–12, ISBN 3-540-33286-3.
[37] Phillips WRC, Wu Z. On the instability of wave-catalyzed longitudinal vortices
in strong shear. J Fluid Mech 1994;272:235–54.
[38] Piomelli U, Chasnov JR. Large-eddy simulations: theory and applications. In:
Hallbäck M, Henningson DS, Johansson AV, Alfredson PH, editors. Turbulence
and transition modeling. Kluwer; 1996. p. 269–331.

457

[39] Pope SB. Turbulent ﬂows. Cambridge University Press; 2000.
[40] Rapp Ch, Manhart M. Experimental investigations on the turbulent ﬂow
over a periodic hill geometry. In: Fifth international symposium on
turbulence and shear ﬂow phenomena, August 27–29, 2007, Garching,
Germany.
[41] Rhie CM, Chow WL. A numerical study of the turbulent ﬂow past an isolated
airfoil with trailing edge separation. AIAA J 1983;21:1525–32.
[42] Rodi W, Bonnin CJ, Buchal T, editors. In: Proceedings of the ERCOFTAC
workshop on data bases and testing of calculation methods for turbulent
ﬂows. In association with 4th ERCOFTAC/IAHR workshop on reﬁned ﬂow
modeling. Germany: University of Karlsruhe; April 3–7, 1995.
[43] Šarić S, Jakirlić S, Breuer M, Jaffrézic B, Deng G, Chikhaoui O,et al. Evaluation of
detached-eddy simulations for predicting the ﬂow over periodic hills. In: Eric
Cancès and Jean-Frédéric Gerbeau, editors. ESAIM Proceedings CEMRACS 2005
(Centre d’été Mathématique de Recherche Avancée en Calcul Scientiﬁque).
Computational aeroacoustics and computational ﬂuid dynamics in turbulent
ﬂows, Marseille, France, July
18–August 26, 2005. vol. 16, 2007. p.
133–45.
[44] Schumann U. Subgrid-scale model for ﬁnite-difference simulations of
turbulent ﬂows in plane channels and annuli. J Comput Phys 1975;18:
376–404.
[45] Smagorinsky J. General circulation experiments with the primitive equations,
I, the basic experiment. Mon Weather Rev 1963;91:99–165.
[46] Stone HL. Iterative solution of implicit approximations of multidimensional
partial differential equations. SIAM J Numer Anal 1968;5:530–58.
[47] Temmerman L, Leschziner MA. Large-eddy simulation of separated ﬂow in a
streamwise periodic channel constriction. In: Lindborg A, Johansson E, Eaton J,
Humphrey J, Kasagi N, Leschziner M, Sommerfeld M, editors.
Second
international symposium turbulence and shear ﬂow phenomena, Stockholm,
June 27–29, 2001. p. 399–404.
[48] Temmerman L, Leschziner MA, Mellen CP, Fröhlich J. Investigation of wallfunction approximations and subgrid-scale models in large-eddy simulation of
separated ﬂow in a channel with periodic constrictions. Int J Heat Fluid Flow
2003;24:157–80.
[49] Werner H, Wengle H. Large-eddy simulation of turbulent ﬂow over and around
a cube in a plate channel. In: F.Durst et al., editors. 8th Symposium on
turbulent shear ﬂows. Springer; 1993.

