DPW-8/AePW-4 Buffet Working Group:
An Overview of Mini Workshops 1 and 2
Sansica Andrea∗
Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, JAXA Chofu Aerospace Center, Chofu, Japan
Brent W Pomeroy† and Bret Stanford‡
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, United States
Daniella Raveh§ and Hadar Ben-Gida¶
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
This manuscript presents the findings from the joint DPW-8/AePW-4 Buffet Working Group
regarding Test Case 1, focused on buffet conditions for the ONERA OAT15A supercritical
airfoil. A total of ten angles of attack at both pre- and post-buffet onset conditions have
been selected for freestream Mach and Reynolds numbers of 𝑀 = 0.85 and 𝑅𝑒 = 3 × 106 ,
respectively. The study is divided into steady and unsteady analyses. For steady simulations,
significant scatter was observed in the results, highlighting the lack of grid convergence across
different turbulence models and grid types. Different turbulence models showed significant
deviations in aerodynamic coefficients, with a shock-wave predicted farther downstream than
the experimental observations. Although unsteady simulations, including URANS and Hybrid
RANS/LES models, provided improvements in predicting shock location and behavior, they
still exhibited discrepancies in fluctuation amplitudes and locations. Test Case 1 has provided
valuable lessons in numerical methods, computational resources, and collaborative efforts.
As the Working Group prepares for Test Case 2 involving full-aircraft simulations, careful
consideration of unsteady calculation costs, grid sensitivity studies, and time-integration setups
will be crucial for achieving meaningful results.

I. Nomenclature
𝐴𝑅
𝑐
𝐶𝐷 , 𝐶 𝐿 , 𝐶 𝑀
𝐶𝑝
𝑀
𝑁
𝑅𝑒
𝑃𝑠𝑡 , 𝑃𝑡𝑜𝑡
𝑠
𝑇𝑠𝑡
(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)
𝛼

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

aspect ratio, 𝐴𝑅 = 𝑠/𝑐
chord
drag, lift and pitching moment coefficients
pressure coefficient
Mach number
number of degrees of freedom
Reynolds number
static and total pressure
span
static temperature
streamwise, wall-normal and spanwise coordinates
angle of attack or incidence

∗ Researcher, Fundamental Technology Research Unit, Aviation Technology Directorate, 7-44-1 Jindaiji Higashi-machi, Chofu-shi, Tokyo

182-8522, Japan
† Computational Aerodynamics Research Engineer, Configuration Aerodynamics Branch, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, United
States, and AIAA Senior Member.
‡ Aeroelastics Research Engineer, Aeroelasticity Branch, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, United States, and AIAA Senior
Member.
§ Professor/Dean, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Haifa 3200003, Israel, AIAA Senior Member.
¶ Research Fellow, Faculty of Aerospace Engineering, Haifa 3200003, Israel, AIAA Senior Member.

1

II. Introduction
ver more than two decades, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) Drag Prediction
Workshop (DPW) and Aeroelastic Prediction Workshop (AePW) have aimed at advancing computational methods
in aerospace engineering. DPW focuses on improving drag prediction techniques, where participants benchmark their
computational methods for estimating forces and moments on aircraft at defined conditions. The goal is to enhance drag
prediction accuracy to allow engineers to optimize aircraft design for fuel efficiency, performance, and range, reducing
the cost of operation and environmental impact. AePW, on the other hand, focuses on predicting aeroelastic phenomena,
such as flutter, vibration, and structural deformations, which occur due to the interaction between aerodynamic forces
and structural dynamics. Participants in AePW also work on validating their tools for predicting these behaviors
in various geometries relevant to aviation to improve safety, performance, and reliability. Both workshops foster
collaboration among researchers, industry professionals, and government agencies, facilite knowledge exchange, identify
best practices, and push the boundaries of computational prediction techniques in aerospace engineering. Summaries of
the last editions of both DPW and AePW can be found in [1] and [2–5], respectively.
Given the similarities in focus and objectives, the two workshops recently decided to join forces in a collaborative
multidisciplinary framework that seeks to leverage the expertise of the two communities. Some of the working
groups of the 8𝑡 ℎ DPW (DPW-8, https://aiaa-dpw.larc.nasa.gov/) and 4𝑡 ℎ AePW (AePW-4, https://
nescacademy.nasa.gov/workshops/AePW4/public) are in fact run jointly to boost cross-pollination between
the two workshops. The workshop is divided into seven working groups, each one focusing upon a technical
topic while using a variety of tools. Two of these working groups are DPW-centric, three are AePW-centric,
and two are hybrid. One of these hybrid groups, the Buffet Working Group, is of interest in this manuscript
(https://aiaa-dpw.larc.nasa.gov/WorkingGroups/Group3/group3.html). Buffet is a phenomenon that
occurs on aerodynamic surfaces of a variety of aerospace vehicles - such as main wings - that fly in the transonic speed
regime. Usually referred to as “turbulent transonic buffet", it involves the onset of large, unsteady aerodynamic forces
and structural vibrations, caused by the complex interaction between shock waves and turbulent boundary layers [6, 7].
Because of the unsteady characteristics of both flow and structural dynamics, buffet represents a very challenging
problem for both DPW and AePW communities. The objective of this joint working group is to identify the nature of
pre- and post-buffet flight regimes with unsteady computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Simulations are performed on
both experimentally-measured deformations and with coupled fluid/structure interactions (FSIs).
The test cases selected for the buffet working group are the following:
• Test Case 1: ONERA OAT15A Transonic Airfoil with Steady and Unsteady CFD
• Test Case 2: Common Research Model Unsteady CFD with Committee-Supplied Deformed Wing Geometry
• Test Case 3: Common Research Model Unsteady CFD with Unsteady Fluid/Structure Interaction
The objective of this paper is to provide an overview for Test Case 1. The overview summarizes the data submissions
gathered for the two mini-workshops held at AIAA Scitech in January 2025 and online in May 2025.
The manuscript is structured as follows: reference geometry and experimental data are given in Section III; the
requirements for Test Case 1 are described in Section IV; the committee-provided grids are detailed in Section V;
participants who submitted data are reported in Section VI; the results are summarized in Section VII and some
conclusions and perspective future work are delineated in Section VIII.

O

III. Geometry and Experimental Data Description
The reference data used for Test Case 1 correspond to the experiments carried out in the continuous closed-circuit
transonic S3Ch Wind Tunnel of the ONERA-Meudon Center by Jacquin et al. [8]. The geometry corresponds
to the ONERA OAT15A supercritical airfoil, represented in Figure 1 and openly available, with conditions, at
https://aiaa-dpw.larc.nasa.gov/geometry.html#oat.

Fig. 1

Normalized ONERA OAT15A airfoil.

2

The airfoil has a chord length of 𝑐 = 230 𝑚𝑚, with a relative thickness of 13% and blunt trailing-edge with a thickness
of 0.5% the chord length. The profile is extruded in the spanwise direction and flash-mounted on the wind-tunnel
side-walls. With a span width of 𝑠 = 780 𝑚𝑚, the model aspect ratio is 𝐴𝑅 = 𝑠/𝑐 ≈ 3.4. A tripping strip was located at
7% of the chord downstream of the leading-edge on both pressure and suction sides to trigger transition. For the selected
pressure and temperature at stagnation conditions of 𝑃𝑠𝑡 = 105 𝑃𝑎 and 𝑇𝑠𝑡 = 300 𝐾, the corresponding Reynolds number
based on the airfoil chord is 𝑅𝑒 = 3 × 106 . For a Mach number of 𝑀 = 0.73, the angle of attack (𝛼) was varied between
1.36 and 3.9 degrees. The model is equipped with 68 static pressure taps and 36 unsteady Kulite pressure transducers that
have been used to extract the mean and root-mean-square (rms) reference data, as well as power spectral densities (PSDs).
For some selected cases, oil-flow and Schlieren visualizations were also provided. No forces and moments were provided.
A subset of reference experimental data is available on https://aiaa-dpw.larc.nasa.gov/experiment.html.
While there has been experimental evidence of three-dimensional (3D) effects in the corner regions, the experimental
data are assumed to be span-independent. Based on the analysis of the unsteady experimental measurements, buffet
onset was determined at the angle of attack 𝛼 = 3.10◦ .

IV. Test Case Description
Test Case 1 is based on the ONERA OAT15A experiments described above and aims at functioning as a workshop-wide
validation test for CFD analysis. Within the context of the Buffet Working Group, Test Case 1 is however further divided
into two sub-cases (for steady and unsteady CFD, respectively) and supplementary requirements are added relative to the
rest of the workshop. The main information and requirements for Test Case 1 are reported in Table 2. A detailed description
is given in https://aiaa-dpw.larc.nasa.gov/WorkingGroups/Group3/TestCases/buffet-case1-v3.pdf.
The participants were encouraged to employ their own best practices, but some guidelines were provided in terms of
grids and simulation settings. Simulations settings were generally left up to the user and multiple datasets could be
submitted, but turbulence model versions based on Spalart-Allmaras (SA) formulation [9] were recommended.
The main goal of Test Case 1 was to establish the accuracy of each solver before moving on to the CRM full-aircraft
simulations.
Table 2

Overview of Test Case 1: Buffet Working Group supplemental requirements in bold.

Case

Method

𝑀

𝑅𝑒

𝑇𝑠𝑡 (𝐾)

𝑃𝑡𝑜𝑡 (𝑘 𝑃𝑎)

1a

Steady

0.73

3 × 106

271

102.4

1b

Unsteady

0.73

3 × 106

271

102.4

𝛼 (◦)
1.36, 1.50, 2.50, 3.00, 3.10,
3.25, 3.40, 3.50, 3.60, 3.90
1.36, 1.50, 2.50, 3.00, 3.10,
3.25, 3.40, 3.50, 3.60, 3.90

V. Computational Grids
Results were submitted using a combination of committee-supplied grids and user-generated grids. Both Cadence
and Helden Aerospace provided committee-supplied grids, which users were strongly encouraged to utilize. Previous
DPW, in particular DPW-IV and DPW-V, highlighted the need for high-quality comparisons on consistent grids. These
common grids were released on the DPW website for participant use. Gridding guidelines were developed to ensure
workshop-wide consistency when comparing grid resolutions. While participants were encouraged to utilize the
committee-supplied grids, custom grids were permissible. For Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) approaches,
one-cell wide six-member grid topologies were provided to perform purely two-dimensional (2D) simulations. Higher
fidelity methods, like hybrid RANS/Large Eddy Simulations (LES) or wall-modeled LES (WMLES), were recommended
to use 3D span-periodic airfoils with 10% chord span-width, although grids were not supplied. Best practices for RANS
analysis has been well documented in the literature, but some disagreement exists regarding grid requirements for
scale-resolving schemes. Consequently, the committee encouraged users to develop grids for these unsteady solvers to
help develop recommended best practices. Unfortunately, many participants did not use the committee-supplied grids
and instead submitted data with user-generated grids, and only one participant (ONERA) submitted custom grids for
public use. As key grid metric quantities were not shared, it is extremely difficult to compare submissions that used the
committee-supplied grids and those that generated custom grids. As many submissions used these committee-supplied
grids, a description of the common grids is warranted in this paper.

3

VI. Participants List
Participation in DPW-8 is open to any individual, group, or organization willing to carry out the calculations in
accordance with the specifications provided by the organizing committee. For case 1, a total of 74 datasets were
submitted by 18 participants. Broken down by method and grid, these submissions are:
Method
RANS: 56 datasets
URANS: 11 datasets
Hybrid RANS/LES: 5 datasets
WMLES: 1 dataset
Adaptive Euler: 1 dataset

Grid
Cadence structured: 15 datasets
Cadence unstructured: 35 datasets
Custom: 21 datasets
Helden Aerospace: 3 datasets

The full list of participants in given in Table 3. The turbulence model nomenclature proposed in NASA Turbulence
Modeling Resource website (https://turbmodels.larc.nasa.gov/) is used. All participants were asked to submit
forces & moments and pressure coefficient distributions. Convergence histories for Test Case 1a and time-averaged and
rms components, unsteady pressure probe histories and corresponding PSD at 𝑥/𝑐 = 45 (Kulite 7) for Test Case 1b were
also requested.
Table 3
ID

List of participants to case 1 from Scatter and Buffet working groups.

Team

Organization

Solver

Method

Turbulence Model

Grid
Cadence structured,
Cadence unstructured,
HeldenAero

002

Mestriner

Embraer

CFD++

RANS

SA, SA-RC-QCR
SST

004

Pomeroy,
Jamal,
Pandya

NASA
(Langley CAB)

USM3D-ME

RANS

SA, SA-R,
SA-QCR2000

Cadence unstructured

005

Housman

NASA
(Ames)

LAVA

SA-neg,
SA-neg-RC-comp

Cadence structured
Deck extruded

006

Jirasek

US Air
Force Academy

Loci/CHEM

k-w-Wilkox 1998k,
SST

Cadence unstructured

JAXA

FaSTAR

RANS,
URANS

SA-noft2, SA-noft2-R,
SA-noft2-R-QCR,
SST

Cadence structured,
Custom

Metacomp

CFD++

RANS,
URANS,
HRLES

SA-neg-RC-QCR

Cadence structured,
Deck extruded

SA, SST

Cadence structured,
Cadence unstructured,
Custom,
HeldenAero

007

008

Sansica,
Lusher,
Matsuzaki
Batten,
Bachchan,
Kovvali

RANS
URANS
HRLES
RANS,
URANS,
HRLES

009

Petropoulos,
Sartor

ONERA
(DAAA)

elsA

RANS

010

Goc,
Clark

Boeing
(BCA Technology)

charLES

WMLES

Dynamic Smagorinski

Custom
Cadence unstructured,
Custom adapted

012

014
018

021

023
024
026
027
032

Chwalowski
Massey
Jacobson
Udupa,
Venkatraman
Darbyshire,
Wainwright,
Allan
Lamberson,
Lynch,
Jamal,
Pomeroy
Arnould,
Radigue,
Laurendau
Nash,
Timme
Eldrige-Allegra,
McGowan
Candon,
Gerner
Jansson

NASA
(Langley AEL)

FUN3D

RANS,
URANS

SA-neg, SA-neg-comp
SA-neg-comp-QCR,
SA-neg-RC-comp-QCR,
SST-comp-QCR

IIS

SU2

RANS,
URANS

SA-Edwards

Cadence unstructured

Zenotech

zCFD

RANS

SA-neg,
SST-V-2003

Cadence unstructured

CREATE-AV
NASA Langley

Kestrel

RANS,
URANS

SA-RC-QCR

Cadence unstructured

Polytechnique
Montreal

CHAMPS

RANS

SA

Cadence unstructured

Univ. of Liverpool

TAU

RANS

SA-neg

Cadence unstructured

Corvid Tech.

Raven

RANS

SA, SA-comp

Cadence unstructured

RANS,
URANS
Adaptive
Euler

SA, SA-C,
SST, SST-C

Cadence structured

N/A

Custom

RMIT

N/A

KTH

N/A

4

VII. Results
Data submissions were collected on the shared Github repository available at https://github.com/DragPrediction-Workshop/DPW8-Buffet. While some updates were requested, the results shown here correspond to
those submitted before 2025 May 16th. Steady (Test Case 1a) and unsteady (Test Case 1b) submissions are reported
separately in the following subsections. Some comparisons between steady and unsteady results are also given for those
participants who submitted both steady and unsteady data. In the attempt to find possible trends among the submissions,
the same plots are repeated by grouping and color-coding the solutions based on method, turbulence model or grid type.
Experimental reference data are also added, whenever available. Those datasets that presented formatting issues have
been excluded from the analysis.
A. Test Case 1a: Steady (RANS) Results
1. Grid Study
Based on the experimentally determined buffet onset, the angles of attack 𝛼 = 1.50, 3.10 and 3.90◦ have been
selected as representative cases for pre-onset, onset and post-onset conditions for the analysis of the grid sensitivity.
Aerodynamic coefficients for different grid resolutions (with 𝑁 number of degrees of freedom) are given for the
aforementioned angles of attack in Figures 2, 3 and 4, respectively. The same parameters are presented in two plots,
based on either turbulence model (left column) or grid type (right column). The first thing to notice is that a unique grid
converged solution cannot be found by neither turbulence model nor grid type grouping for any of the angles of attack
reported. For all angles of attack, there is a slight tendency of SA-based results to give higher values of 𝐶𝐷 and 𝐶 𝐿 , and
decreased magnitude of 𝐶 𝑀 compared to those given by models including QCR corrections. Few contributions with
𝑘 − 𝜔 or SST models prevent from drawing any qualitative conclusion. No general trends can be discerned by looking
at the results grouped by grid type. By considering solutions for the finest grid level available, very large differences
can be seen among the submissions. This scatter increases for higher angles of attack and is estimated to be about 10,
50 and 90 𝐶𝐷 counts and 35, 95 and 120 𝐶 𝐿 counts for 𝛼 = 1.50, 3.10 and 3.90◦ , respectively. While the scope of
this working group was not to reduce scatter, it should be highlighted that most of the contributions do not show grid
converged results.
2. Polars
Forces and moments polars for Test Case 1a are shown in Figure 5. Similarly to what was done in the previous
section, the same parameters are reported in two plots, based on either turbulence model (left column) or grid type (right
column). Once again, it is difficult to identify a clear trend based on turbulence model or grid type and large scatter
exists. However, similarly to what was seen in the grid study plots, SA-based results tend to provide higher values of 𝐶𝐷
and 𝐶 𝐿 , and decreased 𝐶 𝑀 compared to those given by models including QCR corrections. For the lowest angle of
attack, about 30 𝐶𝐷 -counts and 40 𝐶 𝐿 counts of difference exist among participants. This discrepancy increases to
75 𝐶𝐷 -counts and 140 𝐶 𝐿 counts for the highest angle of attack. It should be noted that these scatter estimates are
slightly higher than those shown in the previous section because the polars correspond to grid level 4 resolutions. As
mentioned previously, the objective of this working group was not to reduce scatter, as this was the goal of the separate
Source of Scatter Working Group. While it is expected for RANS models to under-perform in the presence of largely
separated flows, a certain level of alert should be however raised, as these values of scatter are similar to those found for
the full-aircraft RANS calculations in DPW-7 [1].
3. Pressure Coefficient Distributions
Sectional pressure coefficient distributions colored by turbulence model are plotted against the experimental
measurements for 𝛼 = 2.50, 3.00, 3.10, 3.25, 3.50 and 3.90◦ in Figure 6. For pre-buffet conditions (𝛼 < 3.10◦ ),
SA-based models including rotation, curvature and QCR correction have a general tendency to predict the shock
much further downstream as compared to the experiments. Things improve for SA-based models that include the
compressibility correction, but differences still exist. At post-buffet conditions, the RANS solutions still predict a very
sharp pressure gradient due to the (steady) shock-wave. The experiments, however, show a pressure gradient that is
“smeared" over a large streamwise range, due to the oscillating behavior of the shock. The discrepancies of some of the
RANS solutions with the experiments at pre-buffet conditions do not necessarily have to be seen as a failure, since
these simulations are purely 2D (i.e. one-cell wide) and do not account for any 3D effects that may be present in the

5

Fig. 2 Case 1a, RANS grid study at 𝛼 = 1.50◦ . The solutions are colored based on (left) turbulence model and
(right) grid type.

6

Fig. 3 Case 1a, RANS grid study at 𝛼 = 3.10◦ . The solutions are colored based on (left) turbulence model and
(right) grid type.

7

Fig. 4 Case 1a, RANS grid study at 𝛼 = 3.90◦ . The solutions are colored based on (left) turbulence model and
(right) grid type.

8

Fig. 5 Case 1a, RANS forces and moments polars. The solutions are colored based on (left) turbulence model
and (right) grid type.

9

experiments.

Fig. 6 Case 1a, RANS 𝐶 𝑃 distributions for 𝛼 = 2.50◦ (top left), 3.00◦ (top right), 3.10◦ (middle left), 3.25◦
(middle right), 3.50◦ (bottom left) and 3.90◦ (bottom right) . The solutions are colored based on turbulence
model.

10

B. Test Case 1b: Unsteady Results
1. Polars
Despite being the main objective of the working group, only about 20% of the submissions correspond to unsteady
calculations. Large majority of the unsteady data sets consist of URANS calculations, but results from higher-fidelity
methods like Hybrid RANS/LES and WMLES were also submitted. Left plots in Figure 7 show the polars for all Test
Case 1b submissions colored by numerical method. The reader should be reminded that these forces and moments are
time-averaged. Similar conclusions on general trends and large scatter observed for the RANS results can be repeated for
the unsteady results. The higher fidelity methods (Hybrid RANS/LES and WMLES) do however indicate a 𝐶 𝐿,𝑚𝑎𝑥 peak
at around 𝛼 = 3.1◦ , the angle of attack for which the experiments indicated buffet onset. For some selected participants
who provided both steady and unsteady calculations, the polars for both RANS (square symbols) and unsteady (triangle
symbols) results are colored by participant ID and reported on the right plots in Figure 7. Considering buffet onset
at 𝛼 = 3.1◦ , one would expect - at least for the RANS vs URANS contributions - that steady and unsteady results
would be the same for the low angles of attack. Differences however exist and may be due to either insufficient iterative
convergence of the RANS solutions or excessively short statistics collection times for the unsteady calculations. While
this needs further investigations, the lack of specific guidelines on how to determine initial transients, appropriate
statistics collection times and initial solution to start the unsteady calculations from does not guarantee consistency
among participants. In the light of this, criteria may be added for future test cases. Another aspect to emphasize is
the values of the aerodynamic forces of the unsteady calculations with respect to their steady counterparts. Generally
speaking, due to the oscillations of the shock-wave and related change in separation size, for the same angle of attack the
time-averaged unsteady forces should be lower with respect to the (steady) RANS ones. This is however not true for all
reported solutions, calling for more in-depth analysis.
2. Pressure Coefficient Distributions
Time-averaged 𝐶 𝑃 distributions colored by numerical method are shown in Figure 8 for 𝛼 = 2.50, 3.00, 3.10, 3.25, 3.50
and 3.90◦ along with the experimental results. Given the scarce number of contributions, it is difficult to make definite
conclusions. The time-averaged CFD solutions move closer to the experimental shock location but are still found to be
too far downstream. Notable exception is the SST-comp-QCR2020 contribution that falls right on top of the reference
data. At post-buffet onset conditions, the smeared shock distributions are qualitatively well reproduced. No striking
differences can be seen in the higher fidelity methods, except for an over-prediction of the suction downstream of the
shock for the Hybrid RANS/LES methods. For the same angles of attack, the experimental 𝐶 𝑃 -rms distributions are
plotted against the numerical ones in Figure 9. Hybrid RANS/LES and SA-based (suspicion here is that some "-comp"
corrections were not reported by the participants) URANS contributions show large pressure fluctuations at low angles
of attack, indicating that buffet onset is predicted too early. URANS calculations with SA-QCR and SST report instead
weak fluctuations and delayed onset. URANS results present difficulties in predicting the correct streamwise shock
excursion and the fluctuation peak location, but behave well downstream of the interaction. The Hybrid RANS/LES
methods instead better capture the fluctuations near the interactions but overestimate them in the aft part of the airfoil.
The WMLES results at the highest angle of attack present some differences in the upstream part of the interaction, but
then generally agree well from the fluctuations peak location.

11

Fig. 7 Case 1b, time-averaged forces and moments polars. Left plots: solutions colored based on method; Right
plots: steady (square symbols) and unsteady (triangle symbols) solutions colored based on participant ID (for
those who submitted data for both cases 1a and 1b).

12

Fig. 8 Case 1b, time-averaged 𝐶 𝑃 distributions for 𝛼 = 2.50◦ (top left), 3.00◦ (top right), 3.10◦ (middle left),
3.25◦ (middle right), 3.50◦ (bottom left) and 3.90◦ (bottom right). The solutions are colored based on method.

13

Fig. 9 Case 1b, 𝐶 𝑃 -rms distributions for 𝛼 = 2.50◦ (top left), 3.00◦ (top right), 3.10◦ (middle left), 3.25◦ (middle
right), 3.50◦ (bottom left) and 3.90◦ (bottom right). The solutions are colored based on participant ID.

14

VIII. Conclusions and Future Work
The present manuscript summarizes the efforts of the joint DPW-8/AePW-4 Buffet Working Group for Test Case 1.
The geometry and experimental data refer to the experiments carried out at ONERA-Meudon Center in the transonic
S3Ch wind tunnel on the ONERA OAT15A supercritical profile at buffet conditions [8]. For the Buffet Working Group,
Test Case 1 is sub-divided into steady and unsteady analyses. A total of 74 datasets were provided by 18 teams. Despite
the main objective of the working group, only 18 datasets concerning unsteady calculations were submitted. While
a few higher fidelity submissions were provided, the large majority consisted of URANS solutions. This indicates a
certain reluctance of the community to perform unsteady calculations, probably due the increased computational cost
and/or difficulties in the correct setting of simulation parameters, such as those related to time-integration. Also, a large
number of participants switched to custom grids, but further discussions should be promoted to understand the reasons.
For the steady part of this study, an evident conclusion is the large scatter that exists among the different submissions.
While participants were encouraged to use their own best-practices and scatter reduction was out of scope, some concern
stands. A general lack of grid convergence at both pre- and post-buffet conditions was found among the submissions,
regardless of turbulence model or grid type. Generally speaking, SA-based results tend to provide higher (lower) values
of 𝐶𝐷 and 𝐶 𝐿 (𝐶 𝑀 ) compared to those given by models including QCR corrections. This is also reflected in the 𝐶 𝑃
distributions, where SA-based models predict the shock-wave farther downstream. As expected, the RANS steady
solutions cannot reproduce oscillating behavior of the flow at post-buffet onset conditions and show a sharp pressure
gradient at the shock. The RANS results are however inaccurate even at pre-buffet onset conditions, with a shock-wave
predicted downstream of the experimental measurements.
Few unsteady contributions prevent forming definite conclusions, but large scatter is also found between URANS,
Hybrid RANS/LES and WMLES contributions at both pre- and post-buffet conditions. The time-averaged 𝐶 𝑃
distributions present improvements with respect to the RANS solutions and the shock location and behavior predicted by
the unsteady calculations is much closer to the experimental measurements, but visible differences still exist. Consistently
with past numerical studies, the 𝐶 𝑃 -rms distributions indicate that the CFD calculations struggle to predict the correct
fluctuation amplitudes and location, with some models and approaches behaving better around the shock or downstream
in the separated region.
Many lessons were learned in Test Case 1, both from a numerical and organizational point of view. With the
full-aircraft simulations planned for Test Case 2, it is important to recognize that the cost of the unsteady calculations
might become prohibitive for many participants with limited resources. An active involvement must be secured in
order to have a sufficient number of contributions for drawing quantitative conclusions. Given the complexity of the
geometries, it might be difficult to have a large number of contributors using custom grids. Coordination between
participants will be required to provide meaningful sensitivity studies on grid and turbulence model. An important
aspect to consider carefully is the time-integration setup. It will be important to promote discussions on time-integration
parameters, transients and statistic collection times. The way unsteady data will be reported also requires close scrutiny
to avoid inconsistencies that will result in poor comparisons.
The kind of activities related to prediction workshops always present significant challenges. Each test case has its
own unique problems and the learning curve is steep. However, much is learned on the way and the efforts of the
community are incommensurable. The Buffet Working Group Organizing Team would like to express sincere gratitude
to all the participants who contributed valuable data and insights during the activities related to Test Case 1. The
dedication and efforts were instrumental in enriching the quality of this work.

Acknowledgments
We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the teams who generated and provided the grid data used in this
study. Their dedication and expertise in developing and sharing these resources were invaluable to the success of our
research. Special thanks to Claudio Pita and Carolyn Woeber from Cadence; Rick Hooker and Andrew Wick from
Helden Aerospace; and Sebastian Deck, Ilias Petropoulos, and Fulvio Sartor from ONERA for their continuous support
and for making their high-quality grid datasets accessible. Without their contributions, this work would not have been
possible. We also acknowledge the technical staff involved in ensuring the integrity and precision of the grid data.

References
[1] Tinoco, E., Summary Data from the Seventh AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, 2023. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2023-3492.

15

[2] Ouellette, J. A., Massey, S., Grauer, J. A., Chin, A. W., Timmermans, H., Aalbers, J., Mkhoyan, I., and Blom, P., Summary of
Results from the Third Aeroelastic Prediction Workshop Flight Test Working Group, 2024. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2024-0415.
[3] Chwalowski, P., McHugh, G., Massey, S., Poplingher, L., Raveh, D. E., Jirasek, A., Giannelis, N. F., Venkatraman, K., Singh, M.,
Ahrabi, B., and Hong, M., Shock-Buffet Prediction Report in Support of the High Angle Working Group at the Third Aeroelastic
Prediction Workshop, 2024. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2024-0417.
[4] Chwalowski, P., Stanford, B., Jacobson, K., Poplingher, L., Raveh, D. E., Jirasek, A., Pagliuca, G., and Marcello, R.,
Flutter Prediction Report in Support of the High Angle Working Group at the Third Aeroelastic Prediction Workshop, 2024.
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2024-0418.
[5] Ritter, M., Hilger, J., Ribeiro, A., Öngüt, A. E., Righi, M., Raveh, D. E., dos Santos, L. G. P., Drachinsky, A., Riso, C., Cesnik,
C. E., Stanford, B., Chwalowski, P., Kovvali, R. K., Duessler, S., Cheng, K. C., Palacios, R., dos Santos, J. P., Marques, F. D.,
Begnini, G. R. R., Verri, A. A., Lima, J. J., de Melo, F. B., and Bussamra, F. L., Collaborative Pazy Wing Analyses for the Third
Aeroelastic Prediction Workshop, 2024. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2024-0419.
[6] Lee, B. H. K., “Self-sustained shock oscillations on airfoils at transonic speeds,” Progress in Aerospace Sciences, Vol. 37, 2001,
pp. 147–196. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0376-0421(01)00003-3.
[7] Giannelis, N. F., Vio, G. A., and Levinski, O., “A review of recent developments in the understanding of transonic shock buffet,”
Progress in Aerospace Sciences, Vol. 92, 2017, pp. 39–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2017.05.004.
[8] Jacquin, L., Molton, P., Deck, S., Maury, B., and Soulevant, D., “Experimental Study of Shock Oscillation over a Transonic
Supercritical Profile,” AIAA Journal, Vol. 47, No. 9, 2009, pp. 1985–1994. https://doi.org/10.2514/1.30190.
[9] Spalart, P., and Allmaras, S., “A one-equation turbulence model for aerodynamic flows,” 30th aerospace sciences meeting and
exhibit, 1992, p. 439. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.1992-439.

16

