              Summary of Data from the Sixth AIAA
         CFD Drag Prediction Workshop: CRM Cases 2 to 5
                                                    Edward N. Tinoco1
                                              Retired, Kent, WA, 98031, USA
                                         Olaf P. Brodersen2 and Stefan Keye3
                 DLR Institute of Aerodynamics and Flow Technology, 38108 Braunschweig, Germany
                                          Kelly R. Laflin4 and Edward Feltrop5
                                        Textron Aviation, Wichita, KS 67215, USA
                                 John C. Vassberg6, Mori Mani7, and Ben Rider8
          The Boeing Company, Seattle, WA, 98124, Huntington Beach, CA 92647, St. Louis, MO, 63301, USA
                                    Richard A. Wahls9, and Joseph H. Morrison10
                               NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA 23681, USA
                                                 David Hue11
                              ONERA-The French Aerospace Lab, 92190 Meudon, France
                                                 Martin Gariepy12
                        École Polytechnique de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 1K3, Canada

                                                  Christopher J. Roy13
                                       Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA

                                                  Dimitri J. Mavriplis14
                                    University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA
                                                             and
                                              Mitsuhiro Murayama15
                         Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, Chofu, Tokyo 182-8522, Japan

              Results from the Sixth AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop Common Research Model
           Cases 2 to 5 are presented. As with past workshops, numerical calculations are performed
           using industry-relevant geometry, methodology, and test cases. Cases 2 to 5 focused on
           force/moment and pressure predictions for the NASA Common Research Model wing-body
           and wing-body-nacelle-pylon configurations, including Case 2 - a grid refinement study and
           nacelle-pylon drag increment prediction study; Case 3 - an angle-of-attack buffet study;

1 Boeing Technical Fellow (Retired), AIAA Associate Fellow
2 Vice Director, AIAA Member
3 Research Scientist, AIAA Member
4 Engineer Specialist, Sr., AIAA Associate Fellow
5 Engineer Specialist, Sr., AIAA Member
6
    Boeing Technical Fellow, AIAA Fellow
7 Boeing Sr. Technical Fellow, AIAA Associate Fellow
8 Sr. Engineer, AIAA Member
9 Strategic Technical Advisor-AAVP, AIAA Fellow
10 Chief Engineer for Modeling and Simulation, Research Directorate, AIAA Associate Fellow
11 Research Engineer, Applied Aerodynamics Department, AIAA Member
12 Research Associate

13 Professor, Aerospace and Ocean Engineering Department, AIAA Associate Fellow
14 Professor Mechanical Engineering, AIAA Associate Fellow

15 Research Engineer, AIAA Member



                                                           1
                                   American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
       Case 4 – an optional wing-body grid adaption study; and Case 5 – an optional wing-body
       coupled aero-structural simulation. The Common Research Model geometry differed from
       previous workshops in that it was deformed to the appropriate static aeroelastic twist and
       deflection at each specified angle-of-attack. The grid refinement study used a common set of
       overset and unstructured grids, as well as user created Multiblock structured, unstructured,
       and Cartesian based grids. For the supplied common grids, six levels of refinement were
       created resulting in grids ranging from 7x106 to 208x106 cells. This study (Case 2) showed
       further reduced scatter from previous workshops, and very good prediction of the nacelle-
       pylon drag increment. Case 3 studied buffet onset at M=0.85 using the Medium grid (20 to
       40x106 nodes) from the above described sequence. The prescribed alpha sweep used finely
       spaced intervals through the zone where wing separation was expected to begin. Although
       the use of the prescribed aeroelastic twist and deflection at each angle-of-attack greatly
       improved the wing pressure distribution agreement with test data, many solutions still
       exhibited premature flow separation. The remaining solutions exhibited a significant spread
       of lift and pitching moment at each angle-of-attack, much of which can be attributed to
       excessive aft pressure loading and shock location variation. Four Case 4 grid adaption
       solutions were submitted. Starting with grids less than 2x10 6 grid points, two solutions
       showed a rapid convergence to an acceptable solution. Four Case 5 coupled aerostructural
       solutions were submitted. Both showed good agreement with experimental data. Results
       from this workshop highlight the continuing need for CFD improvement, particularly for
       conditions with significant flow separation. These comparisons also suggest the need for
       improved experimental diagnostics to guide future CFD development.


                                                I. Nomenclature
AR     Wing Aspect Ratio                                  MAC Mean Aerodynamic Chord
b      Wing Span                                          N       Number of unknowns (GRIDSIZE)
BL     Butt Line Coordinate (y)                           RANS Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
CD     Drag Coefficient (CD_TOT)                          RE      Reynolds Number
CDP    Idealized Profile Drag = CD − CL2/AR              Sref    Reference Area
CDpr   Pressure Drag Coefficient (CD_PR)                  SOB     Side-of-Body
CDsf   Skin-Friction Drag Coefficient (CD_SF)             TE      Wing Trailing Edge
CL     Lift Coefficient (CL)                              WL      Water Line Coordinate (z)
CM     Pitching Moment Coefficient (CM,                   w       Wing Section Bending Deflection
       CM_TOT)                                            x/c     Wing Chord Fraction
CP     Pressure Coefficient (CP) = (P−P∞)/q∞              y+      Normalized Wall Distance
cref   Wing Reference Chord ~ MAC                                Angle-of-attack (ALPHA)
Cf     Local Coefficient of Skin Friction                        Wing Section Twist Deflection
FS     Fuselage Station Coordinate (x)                    c/4    Quarter Chord Sweep
LE     Wing Leading Edge                                         Wing Taper Ratio
                                                          eta (n) Fraction of Wing Semi-Span




                                                     2
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                            I. Introduction
    The AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop (DPW) Series was initiated by a working group of
members from the Applied Aerodynamics Technical Committee of the American Institute of Aeronautics
and Astronautics. The primary goal of the workshop series is to assess the state-of-the-art of modern
computational fluid dynamics methods using geometries and conditions relevant to commercial aircraft.
From the onset, the DPW organizing committee has adhered to a primary set of guidelines and objectives
for the DPW series:

        Assess state-of-the-art Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) methods as practical aerodynamic
         tools for the prediction of forces and moments on industry-relevant geometries, with a focus on
         absolute drag.
        Provide an impartial international forum for evaluating the effectiveness of CFD Navier-Stokes
         solvers.
        Promote balanced participation across academia, government labs, and industry.
        Use common public-domain subject geometries, simple enough to permit high-fidelity
         computations.
        Provide baseline grids to encourage participation and help reduce variability of CFD results.
        Openly discuss and identify areas needing additional research and development.
        Conduct rigorous statistical analyses of CFD results to establish confidence levels in predictions.
        Schedule open-forum sessions to further engage interaction among all interested parties.
        Maintain a public-domain accessible database of geometries, grids, and results.
        Document workshop findings; disseminate this information through publications and
         presentations.

   Five previous workshops have been held prior to the present study, all held in conjunction with the
AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference for that year.

  Year    Location          Configuration                        Case Descriptions
  2001    Anaheim, CA       DLR-F4 Wing-Body                     Single Point Drag Prediction
                                                                 Drag Polar
                                                                 Drag Rise Curves at Constant CL*
  2003    Orlando, FL       DLR-F6 Wing-Body                     Single Point Grid Convergence Study
                            Wing-Body-Nacelle                    Drag Polar
                                                                 Boundary Layer Trip Study*
                                                                 Drag Rise Curves at Constant CL*
  2006    San Francisco,    DLR-F6 Wing-Body with                Single Point Grid Convergence Study
          CA                and without FX2B fairing;            Drag Polar
                            W1/W2 Wing Alone                     Grid Convergence Study
                                                                 Drag Polar
  2009    San Antonio,      NASA Common Research Model           Grid Convergence Study
          TX                Wing-Body and Wing-Body-Tail         Downwash Study
                                                                 Mach Sweep Study*
                                                                 Reynolds Number Study*
  2012    New Orleans,      NASA Common Research Model           Grid Convergence Study
          LA                Wing-Body                            Alpha Sweep Buffet Study
                            2-D Flat Plate*                      Turbulence Model Verification*
                            2-D Bump-in-channel*
                            2-D NACA 0012 Airfoil*
                                                                       *Optional Cases

    While there have been some variations, the workshops have typically used subjects based on
commercial transport wing-body configurations - a consensus of the organizing committee based on a
reasonable compromise between simplicity and industry relevance. The vast majority of the participants
                                                    3
                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
submit results generated with Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) codes, although the organizing
committee does not restrict the methodology.
    The first Drag Prediction Workshop1 used the DLR-F4 geometry for the above reasons and due to the
availability of publically released geometry and wind tunnel results2. The focus of the workshop was to
compare absolute drag predictions, including the variation due to grid type and turbulence model type. The
results were also compared directly to the available wind tunnel data. The workshop committee provided a
standard set of Multiblock structured, overset, and unstructured grids for the DLR-F4 geometry to
encourage participation in the workshop and reduce variability in the CFD results. However, participants
were also encouraged to construct their own grids using their best practices so that learned knowledge
concerning grid generation and drag prediction might be shared among workshop attendees. The test cases
were chosen to reflect the interests of industry and included a fixed-CL single point solution, drag polar, and
constant-CL drag rise data sets. To help encourage wide participation, a formal paper documenting results
was not required at the workshop. Eighteen participants submitted results, using 14 different CFD codes;
many submitted multiple sets of data exercising different options in their codes, e.g., turbulence models
and/or different grids. A summary of these results was documented by the DPW-I organizing committee3.
Because of strong participation, DPW-I successfully amassed a CFD data set suitable for statistical
analysis4. However, the results of that analysis were rather disappointing, showing a 270-drag-count (a
drag count = 0.0001 CD) spread in the fixed-CL data, with a 100:1 confidence interval of more than ±50
drag counts.
    Despite the somewhat disappointing results, the consensus of the participants and organizers was that
DPW-I was a definitive success. First and foremost, it was initiated as a “grass roots” effort by CFD
developers, researchers, and practitioners to focus on a common problem of interest to the aerospace
industry. There was open and honest exchange of common practices and issues that identified areas for
further research and scrutiny. The workshop framework was tested successfully on high fidelity 3D RANS
methods using a common geometry, grids, and test cases. Finally, it reminded the CFD community that
CFD is not a fully mature discipline.
    The interest generated from the workshop was continued and resulted in several individual efforts
documenting results more formally5-8, presented at a special session of the 2002 AIAA Aerospace Sciences
Meeting and Exhibit in Reno, NV. The interest generated by DPW-I naturally led to the planning and
organization of the 2nd AIAA Drag Prediction Workshop, DPW-II. The DPW-II organizing committee,
recognizing the success of DPW-I, maintained the format and objectives for DPW-II.
    The second workshop9 used the DLR-F6 as the subject geometry in both wing-body (WB, similar to
DLR-F4) and wing-body-nacelle-pylon (WBNP) form. The DPW-II organizing committee worked with
DLR and ONERA to make pertinent experimental data available to the public domain. One specific
objective of DPW-II was the prediction of the incremental drag associated with nacelle/pylon installation.
The F6 geometry contained known pockets of flow separation more severe than the F4; occurring
predominantly at the wing/body and wing/pylon juncture regions. The results from the workshop were
documented with a summary paper,10 a statistical analysis,11 an invited reflections paper12 on the workshop
series, and numerous participant papers13-21 in two special sessions of the 2004 AIAA Aerospace Sciences
Meeting in Reno, NV. A conclusion of DPW-II was that the separated flow regions made it difficult to
draw meaningful conclusions with respect to grid convergence and drag prediction. During the follow-up
open-forum discussions, the CFD community voiced the desire for the organizing committee to include in
the third workshop: a) Blind Test Cases, and b) Simpler Geometries. The request for blind test cases is
motivated by an earnest attempt to better establish a measure of the CFD community’s capability to predict
absolute drag, rather than match it after-the-fact. The request for simpler geometries allows more extensive
research in studies of asymptotic grid convergence.
    The third workshop22 retained the DLR-F6 WB from DPW-II as a baseline configuration to provide a
bridge to the previous workshop. However, to test the hypothesis that the grid-convergence issues of
DPW-II were the direct result of the large pockets of flow separation, a new wing-body fairing was
designed to eliminate the side-of-body separation. Details of the FX2B fairing design are documented by
Vassberg23. In addition, to help reduce the wing upper-surface trailing-edge flow separation, a higher
Reynolds number was introduced for the WB test cases. These changes in both geometry and flow
condition also provided the DPW-III participants a blind test since no test data would be available prior to
the workshop. Furthermore, two wing-alone geometries were created to provide workshop participants
with simpler configurations on which more extensive grid-convergence studies could be conducted; these
                                                    4
                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
wings were designed to exhibit no appreciable separation at their design conditions. The DPW-III was
heavily documented with summary papers24,25, a statistical analysis paper26, participant papers27-30, and a
special section of the AIAA Journal of Aircraft, edited by Vassberg31–36. After three workshops, the
organizing committee recognized that a recurring theme of the workshop series was related to grid quality
and resolution – see Mavriplis et al.37
    For the fourth workshop38 a completely new geometry was developed, called the Common Research
Model (CRM). The NASA Subsonic Fixed Wing (SFW) Aerodynamics Technical Working Group
(TWG), in collaboration with the DPW Organizing Committee, developed the CRM. This wing-body (with
and without nacelle-pylons and horizontal tail) configuration is representative of a contemporary high-
performance transonic transport. A detailed description of its development is given by Vassberg et al.39
    One aspect of DPW-IV different from the other workshops was in the timing of the availability of wind-
tunnel test data on the subject geometries. In DPW-IV, the workshop was held before any experimental
data were collected and is a set of blind tests. Due to past observations of grid dependence on the solutions,
a greater emphasis was placed on establishing a comprehensive set of meshing guidelines for the generation
of baseline grid families. With these guidelines in place, grids were requested from several organizations
for structured multiblock, overset, and unstructured types. Each grid family was required to include a
Coarse (C), Medium (M), and Fine (F) grid; adding an optional Extra-Fine (X) grid was also encouraged.
Target sizes for these grids were 3.5, 10, 35, and 100 million unknowns, respectively. The Medium mesh
was intended to be representative of current engineering applications of CFD being used to estimate
absolute drag levels on similar configurations. A total of 74 meshes of 18 families were provided and made
available to participants for use.
    The fourth workshop requested grid convergence and Mach sweep computations as in the previous
workshops, plus downwash and Reynolds Number studies. Data were submitted from 19 organizations
totaling 29 individual datasets. For the grid refinement study, a Richardson Extrapolation methodology
was employed to estimate a continuum value for the total drag coefficient. Excluding a single outlier, the
scatter band for DPW-IV reduces dramatically to 41 counts, which is a definite improvement over DPW-I
(with one outlier, the range for the total drag coefficient spanned 152 counts). While this improvement is
quite significant, the confidence level is not down to a low enough level to compete with experimental
methods. Documentation for these results can be found in summary papers 40-41 and in individual
contributing papers42-56 from two special sessions held at the 28 th Applied Aerodynamics Conference in
June 2010.
    Despite the emphasis placed on grid generation with the intent of reducing the associated errors, the
variation in the DPW-IV results was still disappointing. For the fifth workshop57, which was held in
conjunction with the 30th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics conference in June 2012, a new approach was
taken with the goal of reducing grid-related errors even further. As with the fourth workshop, the NASA
Common Research Model wing body configuration was used for the geometry (without tail). For the grids,
a unified baseline58 family of Multiblock structured meshes was developed with six different levels
ranging in size from 0.64x106 (Tiny) to 136x106 (Superfine) mesh points. Each successive coarse level was
derived directly from the finest mesh. Only five blocks were used. Once the cloud of points was defined
for this series of grids, then Overset and Unstructured grids were derived. The unstructured grids were
defined in Hexahedral, and Prismatic elements, plus a hybrid grid with Prismatic boundary layer and
Tetrahedral field elements was defined.
    The test cases included a grid refinement study using the common grids or user-supplied custom grids if
desired. The second case focused on buffet prediction, with a finely spaced alpha sweep spanning the
range where flow separation on the wing was observed in the wind tunnel data and the results in DPW-IV.
This was a change from previous workshops, where angle-of-attack sweeps from 0° to 4° were calculated
for the purpose of determining trimmed drag polars. For a commercial transport like the CRM, high-speed
lines development is undoubtedly very important, as it would contribute to whether speed and range goals
are met. However, it usually comprises less than 25% of the total aerodynamics-related airplane
development effort. Significant effort must also be paid to loads, handling qualities, and other constraints
that are required to meet structural and certification requirements. Many of these high-speed flight
concerns occur at the edges of the flight envelope, which are characterized by large regions of separated
flows. For the Fifth Drag Prediction Workshop, the buffet study was included to assess CFD prediction in
this regime. The optional third test case used geometries, grids, and conditions from the Turbulence Model

                                                    5
                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Resource website59 prepared by the Turbulence Model Benchmarking Working Group. Three cases were
selected: 1) 2D Zero Pressure Gradient Flat Plate, 2) 2D Bump-in-channel, and 3) 2D NACA 0012 Airfoil.
These test cases were designed to discriminate between turbulence model implementations through
rigorous grid convergence studies. Documentation for these results can be found in summary papers 60-61
and in individual contributing papers62-70 from two special sessions held at the 51st Aerospace Sciences
Meeting, January 2013, the 52nd Aerospace Sciences Meeting, January 2014, and a special collection in the
AIAA Journal of Aircraft71.
    This paper presents an overview of the computational results, geometry, and grid definitions used for
Cases 2-5 of the Sixth Drag Prediction Workshop (DPW-VI)72. The Sixth Drag Prediction Workshop was
held in conjunction with AIAA Aviation 2016, and included 25 participant teams from 4 continents
representing government, industry, academic, and commercial CFD organizations. The workshop again
focused on the CRM model and the NACA 0012 airfoil. Detailed grid convergence studies for drag and
skin friction coefficient for the Case 1 Turbulence Modeling results based on the NACA 0012 airfoil are
presented in Ref. 73. Cases 2-5, which involve the CRM model, are presented in this paper. For the CRM,
four case studies were specified, two of which were optional. The four test cases are described in more
detail in Section IV of this paper. New for DPW-VI is the inclusion of the static aeroelastic deformation in
the definition of the CRM models for each angle-of-attack/CL condition specified in the test cases. This
makes comparisons to force, moment, and pressure data from the related wind tunnel tests more meaningful
in that the geometry of the computational model better represents that of the wind tunnel model at the
specified flow condition. The participant data for the Case 2 grid refinement study of both the CRM Wing-
Body (WB) and the Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon (WBNP) models are analyzed, including Force/Moment
predictions, wing pressure distributions, and flow separation patterns at the wing/body trailing edge
juncture. Richardson extrapolation can be used to estimate the continuum force levels and the drag
increment between the two configurations. Results of a statistical analysis of Case 2 are presented in Ref.
74. Analysis of the Case 3 static aeroelastic/buffet study is presented, including force/moment and pressure
predictions with comparisons to wind tunnel test data. Flow separation predictions at the wing/body
trailing edge juncture and wing trailing edge are also shown. The goal here was the assessment of CFD in
flight regimes where increasing levels of flow separation are expected. Results are also shown for the two
optional cases: Case 4 grid adaptation, and Case 5 coupled aerostructural simulation. Case 5 is only briefly
covered here for completeness. A detailed description of Case 5 results can be found in Ref. 75.

                         II. Geometry and Experimental Data Description

    The subject geometry for DPW-VI Cases 2 through 5 is the Common Research Model39 (CRM)
developed jointly by the NASA Subsonic Fixed Wing (SFW) Aerodynamics Technical Working Group
(TWG) and the DPW Organizing Committee. The CRM represents a modern transonic commercial
transport airplane, and was designed as a full configuration with a low wing, body, horizontal tail, and
engine nacelles mounted below the wing. For this workshop, the wing-body and wing-body-nacelle-pylon
configurations were used. A rendering of the wing-body-nacelle-pylon configuration geometry is shown in
Fig. 1, along with a photo of the wing-body wind tunnel model (with horizontal tail) installed in the NASA
Ames Research Center Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel 11- by 11-Foot Transonic Wind Tunnel (11-Foot TWT).
The CRM was also the subject geometry for DPW-IV and DPW-V.
    The wing is designed for a nominal condition of Mach=0.85, CL=0.50, and Reynolds Number 40x106
based on cref. Pertinent geometric parameters are listed in Table 1. The wing is a supercritical design, and
the Boeing Company took the lead on the aerodynamic design. Certain features are designed into the wing
profile for the purposes of research and development. For example, the upper-surface pressure recovery
over the outboard wing is intentionally made aggressively adverse over the last 10-15% local chord. This
promotes separation of the upper-surface boundary layer in close proximity to the wing trailing edge (TE)
at lift conditions slightly above the design point. The strong adverse pressure gradient will likely amplify
the differences in various turbulence models that may be employed by DPW participants. Another feature
is that the span loading is designed to be very nearly elliptical as compared to a more practical design that
would use a compromise distribution (more triangular) to reduce structural loads and decrease airframe
weight. This feature is included to provide a challenge for possible future workshops on aerodynamic
shape optimization that might explore structure and fuel weight trade-offs.

                                                    6
                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
   In assessing the accuracy of CFD, wind tunnel results are frequently used as the “gold standard.”
However, even if we had the perfect CFD code, we would not, nor should we get perfect agreement with
wind tunnel results, because the wind tunnel is also imperfect. Each wind tunnel experiment has its own
imperfections, which must be understood or at least recognized in order to assess or validate the CFD.
Differences in the “test” setup between Wind Tunnel and CFD are well known, and a few are listed below:

                  Wind Tunnel                       CFD
                  Walls                             Free Air
                  Support System (Sting)            Free Air
                  Laminar/Turbulent (Tripped)       “Fully” Turbulent Specified (usually)
                  Aeroelastic Deformation           Rigid Shape (except Case 5)
                  Measurement Uncertainty           Numerical Uncertainty and Error
                  Corrections for known effects     No Corrections

    Clearly there are potentially significant differences between what Wind Tunnel and CFD are
measuring/computing. Effective CFD assessment requires intimate knowledge of both the CFD and the
experimental data being compared. CFD assessment cannot consist of the comparison of the results of one
code to those of one experiment. Rather, it is the agglomeration of comparisons at multiple conditions,
code-to-code comparisons, an understanding of the wind tunnel corrections, etc., that leads to the
understanding of the CFD for use as an engineering tool.
    An advantageous outcome of the collaborative endeavor sponsored by the NASA Aerodynamics
Technical Working Group (TWG) has been that the CRM has now been tested in several facilities thus far,
and the data from several of these tests are now publicly available. The National Transonic Facility (NTF)
at NASA Langley tested the CRM during January - February 2010, followed by a test at the NASA Ames
11-Foot TWT (Unitary Plan Wind Tunnel 11- by 11-Foot Transonic Wind Tunnel) during March - April
2010. Data from the Langley and Ames tests have been released to the public domain by Rivers and
Dittberner76-78. The CRM Wing-Body configuration was tested at the European Transonic Wind Tunnel
(ETW) facility in February 201479. These data have also been released to the public domain80. These three
tests all used the same physical wind tunnel model. A slightly larger version of the CRM Wing-Body-Tail
was more recently built by ONERA and tested in the ONERA S1MA wind tunnel81. In 2012, an 80% scale
model of the NASA CRM built by JAXA was tested in the JAXA 2m x 2m Transonic Wind Tunnel82.
    A comparison of data from the various wind tunnels shows that the wing pressure distributions are
virtually indistinguishable at the conditions specified for DPW-VI.           Whether this is true for other
conditions has not been checked in detail. Force and moment data from the different wind tunnels do
differ. It is believed that these differences are mainly due to the corrections applied to the “raw” measured
data to account for wind tunnel walls, mounting system, nonuniform flow (buoyancy, upflow, etc.), Mach
blockage, lift interference, etc. Each wind tunnel facility tries very hard to determine the “best” set of
corrections to its data to simulate “free air.” The CRM test data do not include mounting system
corrections. Mounting system effects, which require a special set of tests to determine, are usually not
included in the standard set of corrections applied to the wind tunnel data. Because of the flow anomalies
present in every wind tunnel and the approximate nature of the corrections applied to account for these
irregularities, the absolute measurement of forces and moments corresponding to “free air” is impractical if
not impossible. It is therefore not unusual that the drag levels will differ between wind tunnels. Today’s
CFD requires modeling of turbulence and transition. Perhaps when direct numerical simulation of the
Navier-Stokes equations is possible for complex configurations at high Reynolds number will the
calculation of absolute forces and moments will be possible. However, the calculation or measurement of
increments between two similar configurations should certainly be feasible with carefully executed wind
tunnel test programs and CFD. For comparison purposes, test data from the NASA 11-Foot TWT and NTF
tests will be used. Both the Wing-Body and the Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon configurations of the same
physical model were tested in these two tunnel facilities.
    New for DPW-VI is the inclusion of the static aeroelastic deformation in the definition of the CRM
models for each angle-of-attack/CL condition specified in the test cases. The wing static aeroelastic
bending and twist deflection were derived using a videogrammetry technique in which the position of

                                                    7
                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
markers on the wing was measured during the test. The bending and twist deflection used to define the
geometries for DPW-VI were based on data measured in the ETW test in 2014. While the test results from
the ETW test and those from the NASA NTF and 11-Foot TWT tests were quite similar, it was decided to
use the ETW results. These data were interpolated to the angles-of-attack required in test cases 2 to 4 to
define the various geometries83. Static aeroelastic wing twist for various angles-of-attack is shown in Fig.
2. Note that the resulting aeroelastic twist is small, amounting to only a little over one degree near the wing
tip. However, at transonic flow conditions, this small amount of aeroelastic wing twist has a significant
effect on the resulting pressure distributions as shown in Fig. 3 for two spanwise locations. Computed lift,
drag, and pitching moment are also affected. Inclusion of the aeroelastic deformation makes comparisons
to force, moment, and pressure data from the related wind tunnel tests more meaningful in that the
geometry of the computational model better represents that of the wind tunnel model at the specified flow
condition.
    Limitations in the total number of pressure taps that can be built into the wind tunnel model and
subsequent plugged and/or “slow” taps may result in inadequate definition of the experimental pressure
distributions at the various span stations. This is particularly the case in defining the wing shock location in
transonic flow and adequately defining the aft loading near the wing trailing edge. For attached flow
conditions, there is very little change in the pressures near the wing trailing edge. In order to calculate
section lift and moment characteristics, it was necessary to “enhance” the experimental pressure
distributions. The “enhancement” to the pressures near the wing trailing edge was based on a combination
of interpolation/extrapolation guided by experience with test data and CFD. At three midspan stations,
missing or very “slow” taps required a further “enhancement.” These “enhanced pressures” were based on
pressure measurements from the JAXA 80% CRM model, which did not suffer these pressure tap
manufacturing deficiencies. An example of these enhancements is shown in Fig. 4 for two spanwise
stations. The original pressure data are shown by the open symbols, the enhanced distributions are shown
by the solid symbols.

                   III. Gridding Guidelines and Description of Common Grids

      This section describes the baseline grid families provided by the DPW-VI organizing committee.
This set includes an overset grid family by Boeing, an unstructured mesh family by NASA, and an
unstructured mesh family by DLR. Additional information of each baseline grid family is provided in this
section below. Since these grids were developed by several different people from different institutions, a
set of gridding guidelines were developed beforehand, in order to maintain some level of consistency
between the baseline grid families of the various types of grid systems. These gridding guidelines were
then used by the various grid developers as a target end state of their grid systems and families. We note
that while these gridding guidelines are fairly comprehensive, the resulting grid systems do not strictly
conform to them. The reasons for this vary, but are usually the result of being difficult to implement.
Hence, the baseline grid families closely conform to most of the gridding guidelines. The DPW-VI
gridding guidelines are given in Table 2.

A. Baseline Overset Grid Families for DPW-VI
     The baseline overset grid family was developed by Leonel Serrano and John Vassberg of Boeing, and
reviewed by Tony Sclafani, Mark DeHaan, Gaetan Kenway, Jim Coder and Tom Pulliam. This group also
comprised the principal set of participants who used the baseline overset grid systems in DPW-VI.
     The basic layout of the overset structured meshes began with an exercise in numerology which
addressed the gridding guidelines on: a) family members being parametrically equivalent, b) growth
between family member sizes being about 1.5x, c) grid blocks being multigrid friendly, d) having at least
two constantly-spaced cells at all viscous walls, and e) retaining feature lines in all members of the grid
family. In order to grow grid size by a factor of about 1.5x, the growth factor in each of the three
computational directions should be about 1.15x, as 1.15 3 ~ 1.5, whereas 1.15 is about 8/7, and we adopted
this rational growth factor for our fine-to-extrafine mesh. Working backward and forward, this established
the growth factor sequence of: Tiny x (5/4)3 = Coarse x (6/5) 3 = Medium x (7/6) 3 = Fine x (8/7) 3 =
Extrafine x (9/8) 3 = Ultrafine. Hence, the grid sizes of this six-member grid family span just over an order-
of-magnitude, or a factor of 11.4x = (9/4) 3. Also, by using a cell-count dimension that is evenly divisible

                                                     8
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
by 4 on each pertinent segment of the Tiny mesh, the span of the segments will be exactly maintained for
each of the members of the grid family. For example, the segments of the airfoil sections on the wing of
the Tiny mesh were dimensioned as 16 cells on the trailing-edge, 88 cells on the upper surface, and 88 cells
on the lower surface, for a total of 192 cells around the airfoils. Hence, all members of the overset grid
family retain the two trailing-edge lines as well as the leading-edge line in their surface grids. Applying
this approach throughout the grid layout, the intersection lines of the wing-body, the wing-pylon, and the
nacelle-pylon, as well as the wing planform break, and pylon and nacelle leading and trailing edges were all
consistently maintained across all grid-family members.
      With a basic understanding of our strategy to grid dimensions, a template mesh and topology layout
was developed for the wing/body/nacelle/pylon (WBNP) geometry. The WBNP grid layout was comprised
of 25 blocks. This template mesh was used to generate a parametrically equivalent family of WBNP grids.
To generate the wing/body (WB) grid family, the NP grids were simply removed from the WBNP grids,
leaving 8 blocks to define the WB overset grid systems. The gridding guidelines recommended a ratio of
grid sizes between the WBNP and WB systems of 1.3x-1.5x, whereas this ratio for the overset grid systems
was about 1.6x.
      The topology of the near-field grid blocks about the WBNP with a focus on the NP group is shown in
Fig. 5. Here, the fuselage is fully defined by three grid blocks; a half O-mesh covering most of the
fuselage, a warped block at the nose, and a collar grid at the wing-body juncture. The wing is represented
by an O-mesh wrapping around the airfoil sections, the wing-body collar grid, and a wingtip grid. The
nacelle is comprised of five surface-abutting blocks; clamp grids at the leading and trailing edges, a collar
grid, and inner and outer O-meshes. The pylon has collar grids at the wing and nacelle juncture regions, as
well as a number of patch grids. Finally, a global box grid encompasses all of the above and places the
farfield boundary at about 100 semispans from the CRM configuration. The WBNP surface grids for each
grid size were created using ICEM-CFD HEXA using the template blocking file developed for this
topology and ICEM replay scripts. Then, the surface-abutting grid blocks were generated using the NASA
Chimera Grid Tools (CGT); more specifically, using BUILDVOL and HYPGEN. Finally, the hole-cutting
and block-stitching steps were performed with the BUILDPEG5i script. This complete process was
repeated to develop the WBNP family of grid resolution and another WBNP family of aeroelastic
deflection. The corresponding WB families were developed by dropping the NP grids and rerunning
BUILDPEG5i. This process yielded WB grids without any orphan points and WBNP grids with at most
five orphans. Table 3 provides statistics for the grid family of increasing sizes. Note that for the Tiny
mesh, the viscous spacing was y+ ~ 1, its maximum stretching through the boundary-layer region was
about 1.235, and that 4 cells of constant spacing at the viscous walls were utilized. These characteristics
adhere closely to the gridding guidelines provided above. Note that the grid sizes are given as a total
number of grid points in the systems.
      Fig. 6a provides close-up views of the WBNP surface grids for the Medium mesh. Note that the
spanwise clustering of the wing grid is established to capture gradients induced by the NP group. Retaining
this clustering is somewhat of an overkill for WB simulations, however, provides accurate results for the
NP delta drag evaluations. Fig. 6b depicts a close-up of the nacelle/pylon surface grids that illustrate the
wing-pylon and pylon-nacelle collar grids, as well as numerous patch grids to complete the pylon surface.
In addition to these body-conforming meshes, near-field box grids enclose the fuselage, the wing, and the
nacelle inlet and nozzle openings. The WB collar grid, the O-mesh about the wing, and the wingtip clamp
grid of the Medium mesh are depicted in Figs. 7a, 7b, and 7c, respectively.
      The baseline overset grids can be downloaded from the DPW-VI website72 and are located in the
overset_grids_Boeing_Serrano.REV00 directory. Included in this location is a README.BoeingSerrano
file for additional information about these grid families. There are six WBNP grids and six WB grids about
the ae2p75 geometry that constitute the grid resolution families, and an additional seven WB grids at the
Medium mesh density to fill out the aeroelastic family. All grids were built relative to the version v09
IGES geometry definitions of the CRM WBNPH configuration, also available for download at the DPW-VI
website.

B. Baseline NASA GeoLab Unstructured Meshes for DPW-VI
    The baseline unstructured-mesh families for DPW-VI were developed by Norma Farr and Mike Wiese
of NASA’s GeoLab group. These grids can be downloaded from the DPW-VI website under the
unstructured_NASA_GeoLab.REV01 directory. Sample surface grids are shown in Fig 8. Statistics of the

                                                    9
                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
WB and WBNP grid-refinement families are given in Tables 4 and 5, respectively, and for the WB aero-
elastic family in Table 6.


 C. DLR SOLAR Unstructured Meshes for DPW-VI
     Unstructured quadrilateral/hexahedral dominated grids were generated by Stefan Melber-Wilkending
and Stefan Keye using the commercial, hybrid, quad-dominant grid generation package SOLAR formerly
developed by a consortium of ARA, BAE Systems, QinetiQ, and Airbus.84 Four grid levels, Tiny to Fine,
were successfully built on both configurations. Grid generation was started from the Fine level, deriving
the coarser grids through a linear scaling of meshing sources by a factor of 1/1.51/3 = 0.873. All meshes are
compliant to the DPW-6 gridding guidelines with two exceptions: a) wing and nacelle trailing edge base
spatial resolution was reduced from the required ≫ 8 cells to 2 cells inboard, increasing to 7 cells at the
wing tip; b) wing spanwise spacing was increased from < 0.1% × semi-span at root and engine to ∼ 0.34%.
Table 7 presents the data of the grids available. Fig. 9 shows the quadrilateral-dominated surface grid on
the CRM with pylon and nacelle.

D. Additional Available Meshes for DPW-VI
     Several other grid families were available for download from the DPW-VI website. Mixed element
and all-tet element unstructured grids can be found in the Boeing_Babcock_Unstructured_CC.REV00
directory. The mixed element grids were generated using the MADCAP/AFLR toolset. A mesh sizing
template was developed for the WBNP case and used to generate the 7 grid levels. The nacelle/pylon was
removed and hole filled for the WB cases. The mixed element grids were converted to generate the all-tets
grid sets.
     Another set of unstructured grids was made available by the China Aerodynamics Research and
Development Center (CARDC). These unstructured grids were generated with Pointwsie (version 17.1 R4)
by Dr. Zhang Yaobing. The grids are formatted with CGNS 2.54 and best fitting for cell centered solvers.
These are found in the CARDC_ZhangYB_unstructured_CC.REV00 directory.
     Embraer and CFS Engineering created Multiblock structured grids for the CRM. Embraer made a set
of Multiblock Structured grids for the WB configuration available. These were generated by Marcello
Areal Ferrari using Embraer’s Automatic Mesh Generator (GMA) with Ansys ICEM. These grids are in
GCNS format and are found in the Embraer_Ferrari directory.
     Dominique Charbonnier from CFS Engineering used Ansys ICEM to generate the WBNP grids. These
are also in CGNS format and are found in the CFSE_Charbonnier directory on the DPW-VI website.
     Further details on all the grid families can be found in the presentations in the DPW-VI website.

                                      IV. Test Case Descriptions
    It is recognized that many of the DPW participants are from industry and academia and may have
limited time and resources to devote to this type of study. The test case specifications, as with the grid
definitions, are set to encourage participation by restricting the number of cases to a manageable number
while also providing a challenge to test the state of the art in CFD prediction capabilities. Five test cases
were specified for the Sixth AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop; a verification case based on a two-
dimensional airfoil and four CRM based case studies of which, two were optional.

Case 1 - Verification Study: 2D NACA0012 Airfoil from the Turbulence Modeling Resource (TMR)
       sponsored by the AIAA Fluid Dynamics Technical Committee Turbulence Model Benchmarking
       Working Group (TMBWG). Summary results for Case 1 are presented in Reference 73.

Case 2 - CRM Nacelle-Pylon Drag Increment: Calculate the drag increment between the CRM wing-
         body-nacelle-pylon (WBNP) and the CRM wing-body (WB) configurations. Flow conditions are:
         M = 0.85; Re = 5 million; fixed CL = 0.5 +/- 0.0001; Reference temperature = 100°F; aeroelastic
         deflections at the angle-of-attack 2.75 degrees geometry. Grid convergence study on Baseline WB
         and WBNP grids.

Case 3 - CRM WB Static Aero-Elastic Effect: Angle-of-attack sweeps are conducted using the
         aeroelastic deflections measured in the ETW Wind Tunnel Test. Flow conditions are: M = 0.85;
                                                     10
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
         Re = 5 million; Reference temperature = 100°F; Angle-of-attack sweep = [2.50, 2.75, 3.00, 3.25,
         3.50, 3.75, 4.00] degrees. The Medium Baseline grids defined for each angle-of-attack [7 solutions
         on 7 grids] are to be used.

Case 4 - CRM WB Grid Adaptation [Optional]: Fixed lift condition for the CRM Wing-Body using an
         adapted grid family provided by the participant. Flow conditions are: M = 0.85; Re = 5 million;
         fixed CL = 0.5 +/- 0.0001; Reference temperature = 100°F; aeroelastic deflections at the angle-of-
         attack 2.75 degrees geometry. Start the adaptation process from the Tiny (or Coarse) Baseline
         Mesh. Participants are to document the adaptation process.

Case 5 - CRM WB Coupled Aero-Structural Simulation [Optional]: Fixed lift condition for the CRM
         Wing-Body coupled with computational structural analysis. Flow conditions are: M = 0.85; Re = 5
         million; fixed CL = 0.5 +/- 0.0001; Reference temperature = 100°F; static aeroelastic deflections
         calculated, starting from the undeformed geometry. Start with the undeformed Medium Baseline
         Grid. A structural FEM has been supplied by NASA via the CRM Website. Modal shapes have
         also been made available.

    All CRM simulations are to be “free air” with no wind tunnel walls or support system. The boundary
layer is to be modeled as “fully turbulent” for all cases. No free or fixed laminar to turbulent transition is to
be specified.
    To collect a consistent set of data from each participant, template datasets were supplied. These
templates request lift, drag (broken down into skin friction and pressure components), pitching moment,
pressure distributions at specified span stations, trailing-edge separation locations, dimensions of the side-
of-body separation bubble, grid family and sizes, turbulence model, computing platform and code
performance, number of processors used, number of iterations required, etc. For Case 5, values of the
calculated wing twist and bending deflections were also requested. These workshops capture an extensive
amount of information that serves as a snapshot of the industry capabilities of the time. For example, in the
five workshops held thus far, one obvious trend is that the grid size has grown dramatically. The average
size of the medium WB meshes in DPW-I through DPW-IV have been 3.2, 5.4, 7.8 and 10.9 million,
respectively. This represents a growth rate of ~17% per year during the eight years between DPW-I and
DPW-IV. For DPW-VI, this number has grown from 25 to 50M points for the various families of grids
available. The finest level grids have increased steadily, from just over 3 million unknowns in DPW-I to
225 million for the WBNP in DPW-VI.

                                                  V. Results
    The level of participation in DPW-VI was excellent by many counts. Users submitted data from a wide
variety of sources, code types, grid types, and turbulence models. Some performed studies that specifically
addressed the effects of gridding and/or turbulence modeling with the same code. As mentioned above, the
geometry, test cases, and data format were all uniformly controlled to facilitate the analysis.

A. Participant Descriptions
    The Drag Prediction Workshop is open to any individual, group or organization that wishes to perform
the calculations according to the specifications set out by the organizing committee. The response for
DPW-VI has increased somewhat from the previous workshop, following a trend of gradually increasing
participation.
    A total of 54 datasets were submitted from 25 different teams or organizations. Of these teams, broken
down by location and type as follows:

                 12 North America, 6 Europe, 6 Asia, 1 South America
                 8 Government, 5 Industry, 7 Academia, 5 Commercial

    The presentations by each participant can be found at the DPW-VI website72 and contain a description
of the computational method used and results presented. For Cases 2 to 5, the grid type and turbulence
model breakdown included:

                                                     11
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                 Grid Types:     7    Common Overset (4 Teams)
                                  4    Common Structured Multiblock (3 Teams)
                                  21   Common Unstructured (12 Teams)
                                  15   Custom Unstructured (12 Teams)
                                  7    Custom Cartesian (4 Teams)

                 Turbulence Models:          21       SA (many variants)
                                              15       SA-QCR (many variants)
                                              8        SST (many variants)
                                              2        k-kLe-MEAH2015
                                              3        k- Lam Bremhorst
                                              1        EARSM
                                              1        RSM-
                                              1        Realizable k-
                                                     k
                                              1        LBM-VLES


                 Solvers:                    23       Finite Volume
                                              2        Finite Element
                                              1        Lattice-Boltzmann Method

    New to the DPW series this year was a solution based on the Lattice-Boltzmann Method85 that is totally
different from the classical finite volume/finite element methods used to date. Two sets of solutions were
based on finite element SUPG solvers86, 87 – one more than DPW-V. All participants were asked to submit
forces, moments, pressure, and separation data in the standard format.
    The large number of datasets poses a challenge in the presentation of the data. Each dataset is assigned
an alphanumeric (including Greek) symbol type while colors are used to denote grid or turbulence model
type depending on context. All of the force/moment and pressure plots below follow the scheme listed in
Table 8.

B. Case 2: CRM Nacelle-Pylon Drag Increment
    Case 2 focused on computing the drag increment between the CRM Wing-Body-Nacelle Pylon and the
CRM Wing-Body configurations. This included a grid refinement study for both configurations at M=0.85
and CL=0.500. All computational values for Case 2 are for these values of Mach number and lift
coefficient.     A standard technique in grid convergence studies is to use Richardson extrapolation.
Computational results are plotted versus grid factor, N-2/3 (called GRIDFAC in figures), where N is the
number of unknowns. For second order codes, a linear fit should be observed with decreasing error as long
as the refinement is in the asymptotic region. The y-intercept then estimates the theoretical infinite
resolution (continuum) result. The trends with grid factor, broken out by grid type and turbulence model,
for total drag of the Wing-Body configuration are shown in Fig. 10. Overall, with some exceptions, the
variation of total drag with increasing grid size (decreasing grid factor) is very flat. An extrapolation to the
theoretical infinite resolution indicates that the bulk of the results converge to a band about 5-10 counts
wide! A more detailed parsing of these results will follow shortly. A look at the pressure drag with
increasing grid size shows an even tighter grouping for most solutions, Fig. 11. The skin friction drag
trend, Fig. 12, is also pretty tight, again with a few exceptions. The variation of pitching moment with
increasing grid size is shown in Fig. 13. For many solutions, there is little variation in pitching moment
with increasing grid size while for others there was, but even these appeared to be trending to a similar
continuum level as the other solutions.
    In order to get a better understanding of the total drag trends shown in Fig. 10, those solutions have
been further parsed according to turbulence model for each grid type family. These trends are shown in
Fig. 14 for the GeoLab, Boeing, and custom unstructured grids, the overset grids, the multiblock grids, and
the custom Cartesian grids. Also shown for reference in the figure are experimental values from three
different test runs each at the NTF and 11-Foot TWT wind tunnels. (These wind tunnel campaigns included
both the WB and the WBNP configurations.) It should not be a surprise that the tightest grouping of drag
                                                     12
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
values with increasing grid size is for the overset and multiblock grids. Some of this could be due to the
smaller number of solutions, but it is easier to maintain a degree of consistency in generating a family of
structured grids than it is for unstructured grids. These solutions, based on three different types of
turbulence models, are trending to a drag value in the continuum within 2-3 counts! The solutions based on
the unstructured grids show a 6 to 8 count spread, although several are also converging to the same level of
that of the structured codes, especially when hexahedral dominated unstructured grids are used. The
custom Cartesian grid solutions are interesting. Note the changed scale for these results. One family, I1(I)
and I2() starts with much smaller grids than other solutions. Their biggest grid was about the size as the
smallest of the other families. While solution I2 appears to diverge from the expected trend line, solution
I1 shows an indication that it might trend in the continuum to a value similar to most other solutions.
Solutions K3() and K4() are right inline with those of the overset and multiblock grids. Solution G1,
based on a Lattice-Boltzmann method, is trending to a value in the continuum that, while high, is not too
different from that of the other solutions.
    The trends with grid factor, broken out by grid type and turbulence model, for total drag of the Wing-
Body-Nacelle-Pylon configuration are shown in Fig. 15. Overall, the variation of total drag with increasing
grid size (decreasing grid factor) is very similar to that seen for the Wing-Body configuration. Rather than
dissect these results in a similar manner to what was done for the Wing-Body configuration, we will instead
focus on the drag increment between the Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon and the Wing-Body configurations.
Values of total drag for the two configurations were interpolated to common grid factor values and
differenced. The drag increments (deltaCD = CDWBNP - CDWB) are plotted vs. grid factor shown in Fig. 16.
These have been parsed according to grid type and turbulence model similar to that shown in Fig. 14. It is
interesting to note that in most cases the computed drag increment with increasing grid size falls within the
experimentally determined value of 22.81.2 counts. This value is based on 3 runs for each configuration
from both the NTF and 11-Foot TWT wind tunnels. Careful application of CFD and careful wind tunnel
testing with several repeats can yield very credible drag increments.
    Wing pressure distributions at three wing stations from one data set for the Wing-Body configuration
are shown in Fig. 17. The pressure distributions are from three grid sizes, L1 the smallest to L7 the largest.
Experimental data from the 11-Foot TWT wind tunnel test are shown for two different lift coefficient, C L,
values that bracketed the computational value of CL=0.50. There is very little difference in the distributions
due to grid size. Similar comparisons from other data sets showed even less variation. This is an indication
that even the smallest grids were already quite adequate for predictions of pressure distributions. This is
also attested to by the relative flatness of the drag prediction seen in Fig. 14. Pressure distributions from
the finest grid for the Wing-Body from each solution set submitted are shown in Fig. 18. It should not be
too surprising that, with the exception of distributions for the solution I2, there is little difference between
all the solutions. The differences between the remaining solutions are seen mainly in the shock location
with the differences increasing on the outboard wing stations. Wing and nacelle pressure distributions
from the finest grid for the Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon configuration from each solution set submitted are
shown in Figs. 19 and 20. Similar to that of the Wing-Body, very little difference is seen between wing
pressures for the Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon sets. Nacelle pressure distributions were submitted by less
than half of the participants. These were practically identical to each other.
    New for DPW-VI, wing section characteristics, lift (normal force) and pitching moment coefficients
were requested. These are obtained by integrating pressure coefficient, Cp, vs. chord fraction, x/c. Less
than half of the participants submitted these data sets. Wing section characteristics vs. span fraction, eta,
are shown for both the Wing-Body and Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon configurations in Fig. 21. Given that
there is little difference in wing pressures between data sets for the two configurations, it is not surprising
that the resulting section lift (normal force) and pitching moment characteristics are nearly identical at the
scale plotted in this figure. It is interesting to note that there is little difference between the two
configurations from either the computational or experimental results.
    Results of a statistical analysis of Case 2 are presented in Ref. 74.


C. Case 3 - CRM WB Static Aeroelastic Effect
    The second mandatory CRM case is based on a Wing-Body static aeroelastic/buffet study to investigate
the CFD predictions in an angle-of-attack range where significant flow separation is expected. This flight
regime is of particular importance to determining aerodynamic loads and stability and control
                                                     13
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
characteristics. Seven angles-of-attack were specified between 2.5° and 4.0° at 0.25° increments. As noted
in Section II, in order to account for the static aeroelastic deformation of the wind tunnel model, a separate
geometry/grid was defined for each angle-of-attack requested. Computed results of lift, drag, pitching
moment, wing section pressure and skin friction coefficients at specified spanwise locations, and locations
of flow separation on the wing and side of body were requested at each angle-of-attack. Over 40 data sets
were provided by the Workshop participants for Case 3.
     Lift and pitching moment results from all the Workshop submittals, along with the NTF and 11-Foot
TWT test data are shown in Fig. 22. Most of the solutions are clustered within a “fan” that gets
progressively wider with increasing angle-of-attack. In general, the solutions are indicating a higher lift at a
given angle-of-attack, and a more negative (nose down) pitching moment at a given lift coefficient than
indicated by the test data. Some of this level difference could be due to the lack of mounting system
corrections to the wind tunnel data. It should also be noted that at the higher angles-of-attack there is s
significant amount of buffeting of the wind tunnel model due to the increasing flow separation and shock
movement. There is some unsteady content at the higher angles-of-attack that is not represented by the test
data. The wind tunnel force data are heavily filtered and represent an average value at the particular flight
condition measured. The pressure transducers measuring the wing pressure distributions are not capable of
measuring high frequency variations and also present average values. Mounting system effects and
unsteady aerodynamic content will not account for the significant spread of predicted lift and pitching
moment at the lower angles-of-attack where the flow is well attached.
     All the solutions were examined to determine outliers, and if there was some defining characteristic that
determined the quality of the solution. In order to get a better understanding of the lift trends shown in Fig.
22, those solutions have been further parsed according to turbulence model for each grid type family.
These trends are shown in Fig. 23 for the GeoLab, Boeing, and custom unstructured grids, the overset
grids, the multiblock grids, and the custom Cartesian grids. The outliers were defined as solutions that
exhibited a break in lift (relative to the linear lift vs. α slope), exhibited lift and/or drag considerably outside
the norm of the other solutions, or exhibited wing pressure distributions that were outside the norm of the
other solutions and test data. Outliers were seen in solutions from all grid families, and from SA (without
QCR), SST, and the k-e Lam-Bremhorst turbulence models. Lift break, which is indicative of a large
increase in flow separation, occurred as early as 3° angle-of-attack in one solution.
     The source of the early break can be found by examining the separation data requested by the DPW
organizing committee, shown in Fig. 24, and by examining the wing pressure distributions. Pressure
distributions at select wing eta stations at angles-of-attack of 3.0°, 3.5°, and 4.0° are shown in Figs. 25 to
27. Several solutions exhibited a large side of body (SOB) separation bubble with increasing angle-of-
attack whose effects could be seen in the wing pressure distributions, and in the force and moment data.
The wind tunnel data do not exhibit any evidence of flow separation on the inboard portion of the wing
(first row of pressures located at BL=151), nor does it show an early lift break. All of the solutions
identified with a separation bubble size greater than BL=151 also exhibited a lift break at or below 4
angle-of-attack and have been identified as outliers.
     Another look at the wing section characteristics can be taken by integrating the pressure coefficients
(Cp) vs. chord fraction (x/c) to derive the section lift (normal force) and pitching moment characteristics
shown in Figs. 28 and 29. The section pitching moment coefficients are taken about the quarter chord (0.25
x/c) of each section. Unfortunately these data were provided for less than half of the solutions submitted.
Of the solution sets provided, some had obvious errors and had to be discarded. These figures clearly show
the overprediction of lift and the magnitude of the negative pitching moment compared to the test data,
which is also reflected in the total forces and moments shown in Fig. 22. The early lift loss on the inboard
part of the wing is clearly shown for two of the solutions. The additional piece of information that is
provided by these section characteristics is that the degree of disagreement between the computed and test
results is increasing the further outboard the section is located on the wing.
     Eliminating all the outliers as defined above, we have 21 solutions with lift and pitching moment
characteristics shown in Fig. 30. Even with all the outliers removed there is still an increasing spread of the
lift and pitching moment with increasing angle-of-attack. At 4° angle-of-attack the value of lift coefficient
varies by 0.063 and the spread in pitching moment coefficient is 0.045! This is a bigger spread than we
saw for DPW-V! Each one of these solutions on its own is a valid solution, yet as angle-of-attack increases
the variation between solutions also increases.


                                                      14
                              American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
    The drag characteristics of the remaining solutions are shown in Fig. 31. Also shown are test results
from three repeat runs at both the NTF and 11-Foot TWT wind tunnels. The drag characteristics are plotted
in terms of the idealized profile drag defined as:

             CDP = CD – CL2/ ( AR)

     Plotting CDP instead of CD can be very useful as its variation with C L is significantly diminished, and
therefore, the scale of the plot can be greatly increased. The spread of the drag values is largely driven by
the increasing spread of lift with increasing angle-of-attack. Note that the spread of the drag values at low
lift coefficients is of the same order as the spread of the test data between the two tunnels. Two solutions,
G1 and I1, have been included that on the basis of their total lift and moment characteristics would have
been considered outliers. However, the wing pressure distributions of these solutions show no evidence of
SOB premature separation and are in line with all the other solutions in this group. As shown for CL=0.50,
the excessive drag for G1 is largely due to pressure drag, Fig. 12, and to skin friction drag for I1, Fig. 13.

D. Case 4 - CRM WB Grid Adaptation [Optional]
     New to DPW-VI was the request for grid adaptation solutions of the CRM Wing-Body configuration
as an optional case. This consists of a series of fixed lift, CL=0.50, solutions using an adapted grid family
provided by the participant. This is an active area of CFD research and it was time to take a measure of the
progress. Unfortunately, only five solution sets were provided by three organizations. Two solutions, I2
and I3, were based on the same solver, using the same adaptation technique, but differed in the treatment of
the boundary layer. These employed a Cartesian mesh that can be successively refined to fit geometrical
and flow features. The solver employs a Favre-averaged, cell-center finite volume method. Indicator
functions drive the refinement or coarsening as the solution progresses. The difference between the two
solutions is the wall-function treatment of the boundary layer. I3 features a more complete “thick” wall-
function treatment. I2 employs the original “thin” layer subgrid model. The other three, A1, P1 and P2,
were based on different solvers. A1, OVERFLOW, employs an implicit 2nd-order cell centered finite
volume solver, and employed a feature-based adaption scheme88. P1, BCFD, employs an implicit 2nd-order
cell centered finite volume solver. P2, GGNS, employs 2nd-order node centered SUPG finite-element
discretization with a strong solver that achieves machine precision residual convergence 86. Both P1 and P2
employ the EPIC (Edge Primitive Insertion Collapse) adaptive grid tool 89 focusing on a sizing metric
derived from the Mach Hessian or Entropy Adjoint error.
     Total drag as a function of the grid factor (gridfac) for the five adapted grid solutions is shown on the
left side of Fig. 32. Note that the gridfac scale has been greatly expanded compared to that shown in Fig.
10 for Case 2. The drag values for solutions I2 and I3 are somewhat misleading in that they are not for
constant CL=0.50 value. These cases were run at a constant angle-of-attack, which did not yield a CL=0.50,
resulting in an increasing value of lift and hence drag for the I3 solution, and an incompatible drag level for
the I2 solution. A1 adaption began from the existing coarse grid from Case 2. Both the P1 and P2
solutions started with a relatively small grid of less than 2 million cells. Both show a rapid drop of drag
with the first grid adaption followed by a steady convergence toward the continuum. On the right side of
Fig. 32, the fixed grid solutions from Case 2 have been included and are shown by dashed lines. Note that
drag scale has also been changed. This figure suggests that the P1 and P2 adaptive grid solutions are
converging to the continuum similar to the fixed grid solutions. The wing pressure distributions from A1,
P1, and P2 are essentially indistinguishable from those shown in Fig. 18, but with the characteristic of a
sharper definition of the shocks. Pressures for the I2 and I3 solutions were not at the same C L.
     The P1 and P2 solutions started with small initial grids and ended up with solutions at moderate grid
sizes that rivaled the carefully crafted “fixed” grids of Case 2. The promise that solution adaptive grids
bring is that they should be able to deliver a consistent set of solutions for configurations, and/or conditions
for which prior gridding experience may not be available. Even for this configuration, the “optimum” grid
distribution will change dramatically for a drag rise series ranging from Mach = 0.70 to 0.90. Much work
remains to be done to bring this technology to a “production” capability for 3-D RANS. It is a technology
that needs to be matured.




                                                     15
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
E. Case 5 - CRM WB Coupled Aero-Structural Simulation [Optional]
     Another case new to DPW-VI was the request for a coupled aerostructural simulation. The effects of
static aeroelastic twist and deflection can be very significant at transonic flow conditions. The inclusion of
static aeroelastic deformation of the CRM wind tunnel model in DPW-VI attests to their importance. These
included deformations were based on “after the fact” wind tunnel measurements. Unlike a wind tunnel
model, the deformations of a full-scale airplane wing can be as much as an order of magnitude greater! An
accurate CFD prediction of the flight characteristics of a full-scale airplane (or even a wind tunnel model)
requires that actual static aeroelastic deformation be included in the computational model. A coupled
aerostructural simulation is one approach in achieving this. A NASTRAN ® finite element model was
provided for structural analyses and coupling with an aerodynamic CFD flow solver for analysis of the
CRM Wing-Body configuration at a fixed Mach and lift condition.
     Data for Case 5 was submitted by a total of four teams. Table 9 gives an overview of the numerical
methods used by the participants for CFD, computational structural mechanics (CSM), interpolation of
aerodynamic forces, and mesh deformation. A detailed description of the results for Case 5 is given in Ref.
75.
     Unfortunately, the NASTRAN® bulk data file provided on the CRM website did not include any
definition of boundary conditions for the system matrices, leaving the structural analysis problem statically
undetermined. As a result, the teams used differing locations for the model suspension, cf. Table 9. The
correct suspension, i.e., the one corresponding to the actual model attachment in the wind tunnel, is inside
the fuselage at the inner cylindrical surface of the balance interface. At this location, the model is mounted
to the internal wind tunnel balance during the test. With the wing root suspension used by two participants,
zero deflection is prescribed along the junction line between wing and belly fairing. This suspension
results in neglecting the compliancy of the structural components located between balance interface and
wing root, leading to smaller deformations. Generally, the different model suspensions used in the
structural analysis cause minor differences in the computed wing deformations as will be discussed
subsequently.
     In Fig. 33, the chordwise distribution of static pressure coefficient is plotted. Four spanwise sections
between =0.131 and =0.950 were selected for comparison. Sectional static pressure data has been
submitted by teams J4, L2, and T1. Contrary to the preceding test cases, all experimental validation data
has been taken from the 2014 ETW wind tunnel test campaign78 to ensure consistency between pressure
and deformation data.
     A generally good agreement is found between the different participants and measured data. All three
teams predicted the shock location somewhat downstream of the experimental location. Shock location for
teams J4 and T1 is predicted more upstream compared to L2. This is believed to be due to the one-equation
turbulence model used by L2, whereas J4 and T1 have used a two-equation model. Although minor
differences are also observed in the pressure distributions on the upper wing surface the aero-elastic effects
appear to be correctly captured by all participants. The resulting wing pressure distributions were
essentially identical to those from Case 2.
     Fig. 34 shows the (a) spanwise wing bending and (b) twist distributions. Numerical results are
compared to ETW deformation data from Run 182, data point 531 (=2.99, CL=0.514). Bending
deflections are given in millimeters and refer to the 0.027% scale NTF/ 11-Foot wind tunnel model. For
bending, the best agreement is found for team V5. Here, the maximum deflection deviation at the wing tip
is w = -0.19mm, followed by teams J4 (w = -1.80mm) and L2 (w = -2.18mm). The largest deviation
occurs for team T1 at w = -4.11mm. Apart from that, the deflection curve progression over span is very
close to measured data for all participants, indicating that the spanwise lift distributions between the
different teams match very well.
     The aerodynamically more relevant twist deformation is plotted in Fig. 34(b). Here, the differences
between the finite-element model suspensions become more apparent than for bending. For teams J4 and
T1, who used the model suspension at the wing root, the twist deflection and spanwise deflection gradient
at the innermost wing station are very close to zero, whereas the measurements show a small deflection and
nonzero gradient caused by the compliance of the wind tunnel model structure.
     Twist deflection results for participants T1 and V5 show a steeper gradient over most of the span
compared to the experimental data. It is assumed that these differences are caused by differences in the
structural analysis methods used. Team T1 performs a reduction of the stiffness matrix and computes the
deflections outside NASTRAN®, team V5 uses a modal coupling approach where the deflections are
                                                    16
                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
calculated from a set of normal modes of the system matrices, which, in contradiction to the static coupling
approaches, also take into account the model’s mass distribution. Unfortunately, no sectional lift and
moment data, which would enable a more detailed deformation results analysis, has been submitted by the
participants.

                                                  VI. Issues
     An important goal of the DPW series of workshops is to identify significant issues/shortfalls in need of
further CFD development. DPW-VI highlights continuing issues that, while seeing some progress over the
years, continue to plague the state of CFD and experiment. More detailed information about how the
experimental data were generated is needed to better validate the CFD, and to provide the detailed
information necessary to improve the turbulence models, unsteady simulations, etc.
     The prediction of premature side of body separation continues to plague some simulations. At the
design condition of M=0.85, CL=0.50, this is no longer an issue. However, as angle-of-attack is increased,
some solutions do exhibit excessive side of body separation as shown in Figs. 24-27. The wind tunnel data
do not exhibit any evidence of flow separation on the inboard portion of the wing (i.e., the first row of
pressures located at BL=151). Solutions B3, D1, D2, F1, J1, J2, M1, N1, O1, P1, Q1, S1, V1, V2, V3, and
V4 showed evidence of premature SOB separation along the first row of wing pressures. Solutions A1, B1,
I1, I2, I3, J3, J4, L1, L2, P2, R1, U1, U2, W1, Y1, Z4, Z5, Z6, and Z7 either did not run the angle-of-attack
series, or did not provide sufficient pressure distribution data to determine premature SOB separation. It
should be noted that the force and moment data shown in Fig. 30 including solutions L1, L2, U1, and U2
did not show an early lift break, which is indicative of SOB separation. While some solutions using the SA
and SST turbulence models manage to avoid the premature SOB separation, most did not. Past experience
has shown that premature separation with these turbulence models is very sensitive to gridding details in
the wing-body junction region. This type of 3D corner flow separation continues to need more attention in
turbulence model development and CFD application. The use of the quadratic constitutive relation (QCR)
in the SA turbulence model eliminated the premature separation. In addition, the k-kl-MEAH2015 (B1,
B2), LMB-VLES (G1), EARSM (H2), and RSM-w (L1) turbulence models did not show any evidence of
premature SOB separation up to 4° angle-of-attack.
      Another ongoing issue can be seen in Fig. 30 for lift and pitching moment. The solutions show a lift
higher than experiment and pitching moment more negative than experiment. This can partially be
explained by the lack of corrections to the experimental data for the upper swept sting support to the wind
tunnel model. These corrections require a special set of wind tunnel tests using different mounting systems
to the model. These were not carried out for the CRM in any of the wind tunnel campaigns.
Computational studies87, 90, 91 on the impact of the mounting system show that its effect will be to reduce lift
and reduce the nose-down pitching moment. These studies were based on the CRM model with the
horizontal tail and therefore, cannot be applied this configuration. The mounting system will have a much
greater effect on the model with the horizontal tail than without. In any case, the test corrections would
still not explain the spread of values of the computational results at a given angle-of-attack/CL conditions.
However, the wing pressure distributions do offer a clue. Pressure distributions around the wing trailing
edge from all the solutions and from test data are shown in Fig. 35. As long as the flow is attached, these
distributions vary little over the range of conditions of interest. The computational results are from all the
solutions submitted at the M=0.85, CL=0.50 condition. The pressure coefficient values on the upper
surface of the wing are consistently lower (more negative) than those of the test data. The difference
between the upper and lower surface represents lift and contributes to negative section pitching moment.
These differences become more aggregative the further outboard on the wing. The effect of this increasing
“aft loading” is clearly seen in the section lift (normal force) and pitching moment shown in Figs. 28 and
29. This excessive “aft loading” is seen from every turbulence model, gridding scheme, and solver type
presented in this workshop. It is highly unlikely that this excessive “aft loading” is due to experimental
issues. The computational results of pressure distribution, and forces and moments, are self-consistent. In
the wind tunnel test, the instrumentation is completely independent. The geometry of the wind tunnel
model has been validated. The nearly solid nature of the wing minimizes any chordwise aeroelastic effects.
Pressure distributions from the Case 5 aerostructural aeroelastic computations are included in Fig. 35. This
excessive “aft loading” prediction has also been seen on other wind tunnel models. While progress has
been made with the premature SOB separation, the question of the excessive “aft loading” remains an
issue.
                                                     17
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
     In addition to the “aft-loading” issue, Fig. 30 also shows that the spread in lift at a given angle-of-attack
and the spread in the pitching moment at a given lift coefficient increases with increasing angle-of-attack
and lift coefficient, respectively. This “spread” is in addition to the level changes caused by the excessive
“aft loading.” Looking at the wing pressure distributions at the outboardmost three wing stations shown in
Figs. 25 to 27 provides a clue for the increasing spread. These show pressure distributions for increasing
angles-of-attack. As the angle-of-attack is increased so does the spread of shock location at the outboard
stations. Fig. 36 shows pressure distributions at 4° angle-of-attack only from the solutions remaining after
all the outliers have been eliminated. Note that the large variation of shock location from these solutions
still exists. Compare this to the tight spread of shock locations shown in Fig. 18 from all solutions at
CL=0.50, which corresponds to an angle-of-attack between 2.50° and 2.75°. Each one of these solutions on
its own is a valid solution, yet as angle-of-attack increases so does the spread of shock location on the
outboard portion of the wing. The chaotic situation at these high angles-of-attack may be physical as well
as computational. At 4°, the wind tunnel model is buffeting quite a bit. The force and moment data are
heavily filtered and the pressure transducers are incapable of responding to high frequency variations. One
must ask if steady Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes is adequate for modeling this flow regime. Given the
same turbulence model all steady RANS results should converge to the same answer. The results shown in
Fig. 30 do show some clustering by turbulence model but the greatest variation is between the solutions
based on some version of the SA model that did not exhibit premature separation. How much of these
differences are due to convergence issues and/or grid discretization errors? Will URANS (Unsteady
Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes) be any better, or must one go to an eddy-resolving method such as DES
(Detached Eddy Simulation) to accurately simulate this flow regime? A presentation at the workshop by
Exa, solution G1 based on the Lattice Boltzmann Method, showed significant unsteady content for
solutions at angels-of-attack of 3.5° and higher. The “steady” pressure distributions they submitted were in
line with others that were not deemed outliers. Without detailed experimental measurements that
adequately capture the flow separation and unsteadiness on these type of configurations recommendations
as to the level of “unsteady” modeling necessary to adequately model these flows cannot be made.

                                              VII. Conclusions
     The Sixth Drag Prediction Workshop was held in conjunction with AIAA Aviation 2016. The event
was well attended by a diverse group of expert CFD practitioners from four continents representing
government, industry, academia, and commercial code development institutions. 25 teams contributed
results. This workshop focused on a 2-D turbulence model verification study, and several studies of the
NASA Common Research Model, CRM, wing-body and wing-body-nacelle-pylon configurations. These
included single point grid convergence and drag increment, high-alpha static aeroelastic/buffet conditions,
optional grid adaptation, and optional coupled aerostructural studies. This paper covers the key results
from the CRM Cases 2 to 5 of the workshop. Details of Case 1, the 2-D turbulence model verification
study, are given in Ref. 73, additional details on Case 5 in Ref. 75, and a statistical analysis in Ref. 74.
     A total of 54 datasets for the CRM cases were provided on structured, overset, unstructured, and
Cartesian grids. The use of committee-provided or user-defined grids were pretty evenly divided. Some
teams provided solutions using the same solver and turbulence model but with different grids. Others
provided solutions using the same solver and grid but with different turbulence models.
     The Case 2 Wing-Body grid convergence study showed a steady improvement over the similar study in
DPW-V, especially with respect to unstructured grids. As a whole, the solutions exhibited a “tighter”
convergence of total drag to the continuum with a spread of less than 10 drag counts. The grid
convergence study for the Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon showed a somewhat greater spread. Only four entries
would be considered to be significant outliers. Of significant importance to industry design processes is the
prediction of the drag increment between the two configurations. Here we found that most participants
were able to predict the drag increment within the uncertainty of the test data. With the exception of one
case, there was very little difference seen in the wing or nacelle pressure distributions, or in wing section
lift and pitching moments, due to grid type, turbulence model, convergence level, or solver. Results of a
statistical analysis of Case 2 are presented in Ref. 74.
     For the Case 3 static aeroelastic/buffet study, the lift and pitching moment from most of the solutions
are clustered within a “fan” that gets progressively wider with increasing angle-of-attack. In general, the
solutions indicate a higher lift at a given angle-of-attack, and a more negative (nose down) pitching
moment at a given lift coefficient than observed in the test data. The primary cause appears to be due the
                                                     18
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
excessive “aft loading” predicted by all the submittals, and by the increasing spread in the prediction of the
shock wave on the outboard part of the wing. As in previous workshops, a set of outliers was observed that
had uncharacteristically large wing trailing edge separation at the side of body that contributed to an early
lift break. While some solutions using the SA and SST turbulence models manage to avoid the premature
SOB separation, most did not. The use of the quadratic constitutive relation (QCR) in the SA turbulence
model eliminated the premature separation. In addition, the k-kl-MEAH2015, LMB-VLES, EARSM, and
RSM-w turbulence models did not show any evidence of premature SOB separation up to 4° angle-of-
attack. Inclusion of the static aeroelastic twist and deflection in the configuration definition significantly
improved the agreement with test data of the pressure distributions on the outboard part of the wing. After
the elimination of outliers, each one of the remaining solutions on its own is a valid solution, yet as angle-
of-attack increases so does the spread of shock location on the outboard portion of the wing. The shock
location variation at these high angles-of-attack may be physical as well as computational. At 4°, the wind
tunnel model is buffeting a significant amount. The wind tunnel forces, moments, and pressure data
typically represent “average” steady results. One must ask if steady Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes is
adequate for modeling this flow regime. Will URANS (Unsteady Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes) be
adequate, or must one go to an eddy-resolving method such as DES (Detached Eddy Simulation) to
accurately simulate this flow regime?
      New to DPW-VI was the request for grid adaptation solutions of the CRM Wing-Body configuration
as an optional case. This is an active area of CFD research and it was time to take a measure of the
progress. Five solution sets were provided by three organizations. Three of the solutions exhibited a strong
convergence to the same drag level in the continuum as the fixed grid solutions. The wing pressure
distributions from these solutions are essentially indistinguishable from those of the carefully crafted fixed
grid solutions but with the characteristic of a sharper definition of the shocks. The promise that solution
adaptive grids bring is that they should be able to deliver a consistent set of solutions for configurations,
and/or conditions for which prior gridding experience may not be available. Much work remains to be done
to bring this technology to a “production” capability for 3-D RANS. It is a technology that needs to be
matured.
     Another case new to DPW-VI was the request for a coupled aero-structural simulation. The effects of
static aeroelastic twist and bending can be very significant at transonic flow conditions. The inclusion of
static aeroelastic deformation of the CRM wind tunnel model in DPW-VI attests to their importance. Four
teams submitted solutions. A generally good agreement was found between the teams. The resulting wing
pressure distributions were essentially identical to those from Case 2. Minor deviations from the
experimental data were observed for chordwise shock location. These are likely caused by differences in
wing twist distribution between the individual participants and the different turbulence models used. Some
discrepancies were also found for the slope of the spanwise twist curve. At the wing root, these were traced
back to different boundary conditions applied to the structural model. Other deviations from the
experimental data are assumed to be caused by differences in the structural analysis methods used by the
participants.
     Important issues were raised in this and in previous workshops that point to the need for continuing
CFD and experimental research. More detailed information about how the experimental data were
generated is needed to better validate the CFD, and to provide the detailed information necessary to
improve the turbulence models, unsteady simulations, etc. In particular, experimental force, moment, and
pressure data is needed that adequately captures the flow separation and unsteadiness on these type
configurations. While progress has been made with the prediction of premature SOB separation, this type
of 3D corner flow separation continues to need more attention in turbulence model development and CFD
application. Excessive “aft loading” was seen from every turbulence model, gridding scheme, and solver
type presented in this workshop. It is highly unlikely that this excessive “aft loading” is due to
experimental issues, and is more likely a turbulence modeling issue that needs further attention.

                                                 References
1.   1st AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, Anaheim, CA, June 2001, http://aiaa-
     dpw.larc.nasa.gov/Workshop1/workshop1.html, accessed 23 November 2016.
2.   Redeker, G., “DLR-F4 Wing-Body Configuration,” A Selection of Experimental Test Cases for the Validation of
     CFD Codes, number AR-303, pages B4.1–B4.21. AGARD, August 1994.


                                                     19
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
3.    Levy, D. W., Vassberg, J. C., Wahls, R. A., Zickuhr, T., Agrawal, S., Pirzadeh, S., and Hemsch, M. J., “Summary
      of data from the first AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft, 40(5):875–882, Sep–Oct 2003.
4.    Hemsch, M. J., “Statistical Analysis of CFD Solutions from the Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA paper 2002-
      0842, 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2002.
5.    Rakowitz, M., Eisfeld, B., Schwamborn, D., and Sutcliffe, M., “Structured and Unstructured Computations on the
      DLR-F4 Wing-Body Configuration,” Journal of Aircraft, 40(2):256–264, 2003.
6.    Mavriplis, D. J. and Levy, D. W., “Transonic Drag Predictions Using an Unstructured Multigrid Solver,” AIAA
      Journal of Aircraft, 42(4):887–893, 2005.
7.    Pirzadeh, S. Z. and Frink, N. T., “Assessment of the Unstructured Grid Software TetrUSS for Drag Prediction of
      the DLR-F4 Configuration,” AIAA Paper 2002-0839, 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, Reno,
      NV, January 2002.
8.    Vassberg, J. C., Buning, P. G., and Rumsey, C. L., “Drag Prediction for the DLR-F4 Wing/Body Using
      OVERFLOW and CFL3D on an Overset Mesh,” AIAA Paper 2002-0840, 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting
      & Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2002.
9.    2nd AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, Orlando, FL, June 2003, http://aiaa-
      dpw.larc.nasa.gov/Workshop2/workshop2.html, accessed 23 November 2016.
10.   Laflin, K. R., Vassberg, J. C., Wahls, R. A., Morrison, J. H., Brodersen, O., Rakowitz, M., Tinoco, E. N., and
      Godard, J., “Summary of Data from the Second AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft,
      42(5):1165–1178, 2005.
11.   Hemsch, M. and Morrison, J., “Statistical analysis of CFD solutions from 2nd Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA
      Paper 2004-0556, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
12.   Pfeiffer, N., “Reflections on the Second Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2004-0557, 42nd AIAA
      Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
13.   Brodersen, O. P., Rakowitz, M., Amant, S., Larrieu, P., Destarac, D., and Suttcliffe, M., “Airbus, ONERA and
      DLR Results from the Second AIAA Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft, 42(4):932–940, 2005.
14.   Langtry, R. B., Kuntz, M., and Menter, F., “Drag Prediction of Engine-Airframe Interference Effects with CFX-
      5,” Journal of Aircraft, 42(6):1523–1529, 2005.
15.   Sclafani, J., DeHaan, M. A., and Vassberg, J. C., “OVERFLOW Drag Predictions for the DLR-F6 Transport
      Configuration: A DPW-II Case study,” AIAA Paper 2004-0393, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and
      Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
16.   Rumsey, C., Rivers, M., and Morrison, J., “Study of CFD Variations on Transport Configurations from the 2nd
      AIAA Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2004-0394, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit,
      Reno, NV, January 2004.
17.   Wutzler, K., “Aircraft Drag Prediction using Cobalt,” AIAA Paper 2004-0395, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences
      Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
18.   May, G., Van derWeide, E., Jameson, A., and Shankaran, S., “Drag Prediction of the DLR-F6 Configuration,”
      AIAA Paper 2004-0396, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
19.   Kim, Y., Park, S., and Kwon, J., “Drag Prediction of DLR-F6 Using the Turbulent Navier-Stokes Calculations
      with Multigrid,” AIAA Paper 2004-0397, 42nd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV,
      January 2004.
20.   Yamamoto, K., Ochi, A., Shima, E., and Takaki, R., “CFD Sensitivity to Drag prediction on DLR-F6
      Configuration by Structured Method and Unstructured Method,” AIAA Paper 2004-0398, 42nd AIAA Aerospace
      Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
21.   Tinoco, E. and Su, T., “Drag Prediction with the Zeus/CFL3D System,” AIAA Paper 2004-0552, 42nd AIAA
      Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2004.
22.   3rd AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, San Francisco, CA, June 2006, http://aiaa-
      dpw.larc.nasa.gov/Workshop3/workshop3.html, accessed 23 November 2016.
23.   Vassberg, J. C., Sclafani, A. J., and DeHaan, M. A., “A Wing-Body Fairing Design for the DLR-F6 Model: A
      DPW-III Case Study,” AIAA Paper 2005-4730, AIAA 23rd Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Toronto, Canada,
      June 2005.
24.   Vassberg, J. C., Tinoco, E. N., Mani, M., Brodersen, O. P., Eisfeld, B., Wahls, R. A., Morrison, J. H., Zickuhr, T.,
      Laflin, K. R., and Mavriplis, D. J., “Abridged Summary of the Third AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,”
      Journal of Aircraft, 45(3):781–798, May–June 2008.
25.   Vassberg, J. C., Tinoco, E. N., Mani, M., Brodersen, O. P., Eisfeld, B., Wahls, R. A., Morrison, J. H., Zickuhr, T.,
      Laflin, K. R., and Mavriplis, D. J., “Summary of DLR-F6 Wing-Body Data from the Third AIAA CFD Drag
      Prediction Workshop,” RTO AVT-147 Paper 57, RTO AVT-147 Symposium, Athens, Greece, December 2007.
26.   Morrison, J. H. and Hemsch, M. J., “Statistical Analysis of CFD Solutions from the Third AIAA Drag Prediction
      Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2007-0254, 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January
      2007.



                                                        20
                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
27. Tinoco, E. N., Winkler, C., Mani, M., and Venkatakrishnan, V., “Structured and Unstructured Solvers for the 3rd
    CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2007-0255, 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit,
    Reno, NV, January 2007.
28. Mavriplis, D. J., “Results from the 3rd Drag Prediction Workshop Using the NSU3D Unstructured Mesh Solver,”
    AIAA Paper 2007-0256, 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January 2007.
29. Sclafani, A. J., Vassberg, J. C., Harrison, N. A., DeHaan, M. A., Rumsey, C. L., Rivers, S. M., and Morrison, J.
    H., “Drag Predictions for the DLR-F6 Wing/Body and DPW Wings Using CFL3D and OVERFLOW on an
    Overset Mesh,” AIAA Paper 2007-0257, 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, January
    2007.
30. Brodersen, O., Eisfeld, B., Raddatz, J., and Frohnapfel, P., “DLR Results from the Third AIAA CFD Drag
    Prediction Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2007-0259, 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV,
    January 2007.
31. Tinoco, E. N., Venkatakrishnan, V., Winkler, C., and Mani M., “Structured and Unstructured Solvers for the Third
    AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft, 45(3):738–749, May–June 2008.
32. Mavriplis, D. J., “Third Drag Prediction Workshop Results Using NSU3D Unstructured Mesh Solver,” Journal of
    Aircraft, 45(3):750–761, May–June 2008.
33. Sclafani, A. J., Vassberg, J. C., Harrison, N. A., Rumsey, C. L., Rivers, S. M., and Morrison, J. H., “CFL3D /
    OVERFLOW Results for DLR-F6 Wing/Body and Drag Prediction Workshop Wing,” Journal of Aircraft,
    45(3):762–780, May–June 2008.
34. Murayama, M. and Yamamoto, K., “Comparison Study of Drag Prediction by Structured and Unstructured Mesh
    Method,” Journal of Aircraft, 45(3):799–822, May–June 2008.
35. Brodersen, O., Eisfeld, B., Raddatz, J., and Frohnapfel, P., “DLR results from the third AIAA Computational
    Fluid Dynamics Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft, 45(3):823–836, May–June 2008.
36. Eliasson, P. and Peng, S.-H., “Drag Prediction for the DLR-F6 Wing-Body Configuration Using the Edge Solver,”
    Journal of Aircraft, 45(3):837–847, May–June 2008.
37. Mavriplis, D. J., Vassberg, J. C., Tinoco, E. N., Mani, M., Brodersen, O. P., Eisfeld, B., Wahls, R. H., Morrison,
    J., Zickuhr, T., Levy, D., and Murayama, M., “Grid quality and Resolution Issues from the Drag Prediction
    Workshop Series,” Journal of Aircraft, 46(3):935–950, 2009.
38. 4thAIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, San Antonio, TX, June 2009, http://aiaa-
    dpw.larc.nasa.gov/Workshop4/workshop4.html, accessed 23 November 2016.
39. Vassberg, J. C., DeHaan, M. A., Rivers, S. M., and Wahls, R. A., “Development of a Common Research Model
    for Applied CFD Validation Studies,” AIAA Paper 2008-6919, 26th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference,
    Hawaii, HI, August 2008.
40. Vassberg, J., Tinoco, E., Mani, M., Rider, B., Zickuhr, T., Levy, D., Broderson, O., Eisfeld, B., Crippa, S., Wahls,
    R., Morrison, J., Mavriplis, D., Murayama, M., “Summary of the Fourth AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,”
    AIAA 2010-4547, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
41. Morrison, J., “Statistical Analysis of CFD Solutions from the Fourth Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of
    Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1070-1089 .
42. Sclafani, A. J., Vassberg, J. C., Rumsey, C., DeHaan, M. A., and Pulliam, T. H., “Drag Prediction for the NASA
    CRM Wing/Body/Tail Using CFL3D and OVERFLOW on an Overset Mesh,” Journal of
    Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1101-1117.
43. Hue, D., Gazaix, M., and Esquieu, S., “Computational Drag and Moment Prediction of the DPW4 Configuration
    with elsA,” AIAA Paper 2010-4220, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
44. Mani, M., Rider, B. J., Sclafani, A. J., Winkler, C., Vassberg, J. C., Dorgan, A. J., Cary, A., and Tinoco, E. N.,
    “RANS Technology for Transonic Drag Prediction; a Boeing Perspective of the 4th Drag Prediction Workshop,”
    Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1118-1134.
45. Yamamoto, K., Tanaka, K., and Murayama, M., “Comparison Study of Drag Prediction for the 4th CFD Drag
    Prediction Workshop Using Structured and Unstructured Mesh Methods,” AIAA Paper 2010-4222, 28th AIAA
    Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
46. Brodersen, O., Crippa, S., Eisfeld, B., Keye, S., and Geisbauer, S., “DLR Results for the Fourth AIAA CFD Drag
    Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1135-1148.
47. Eliasson, P., Peng, S., and Tysell, L., “Computations from the 4th Drag Prediction Workshop Using the Edge
    Solver,” AIAA Paper 2010-4548, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
48. Li, G. and Zhou, Z., “Validation of a Multigrid-Based Navier-Stokes Solver for Transonic Flows,” AIAA Paper
    2010-4549, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
49. Mavriplis, D. J. and Long, M., “NSU3D Results for the Fourth AIAA Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of
    Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1161-1171.
50. Lee-Rausch, E., Hammond, E., Nielsen, E., Pirzadeh, S., and Rumsey C., “Application of the FUN3D
    Unstructured-Grid Navier-Stokes Solver to the 4th AIAA Drag Prediction Workshop Cases,” Journal of
    Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1149-1160.


                                                       21
                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
51. Vos, J., Sanchi, S., Gehri, A., and Stephani, P., “DPW4 Results Using Different Grids, Including Near-Field/Far-
    Field Drag Analysis,” AIAA Paper 2010-4552, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June
    2010.
52. Hashimoto, A., Lahur, P., Murakami, K., and Aoyama, T., “Validation of Fully Automatic Grid Generation
    Method on Aircraft Drag Prediction,” AIAA Paper 2010-4669, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference,
    Chicago, IL, June 2010.
53. Hashimoto, Atsushi, Keiichi Murakami, Takashi Aoyama, Kazuomi Yamamoto, Mitsuhiro Murayama, and Paulus
    R. Lahur, “Drag Prediction on NASA Common Research Model Using Automatic Hexahedra Grid-Generation
    Method,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1172-1182
54. Temmerman, L. and Hirsch, C., “Simulations of the CRM Configuration on Unstructured Hexahedral Grids:
    Lessons Learned from the DPW-4 Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2010-4670, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics
    Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
55. Chaffin, M. and Levy, D., “Comparison of Viscous Grid Layer Growth Rate of Unstructured Grids on CFD Drag
    Prediction Workshop Results,” AIAA Paper 2010-4671, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago,
    IL, June 2010.
56. Crippa, S., “Application of Novel Hybrid Mesh Generation Methodologies for Improved Unstructured CFD
    Simulations,” AIAA Paper 2010-4672, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
57. 5th AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, http://aiaa-dpw.larc.nasa.gov/Workshop5/workshop5.html, accessed
    23 November 2016.
58. Vassberg, J. C., “A Unified Baseline Grid about the Common Research Model Wing-Body for the Fifth AIAA
    CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2011-3508, 29th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference,
    Honolulu, HI, June 2011.
59. Rumsey, C., “Langley Research Center Turbulence Modeling Resource,” http://turbmodels.larc.nasa.gov/,
    accessed 23 November 2016.
60. Levy, D. W., Laflin, K. R., Tinoco, E. N., Vassberg, J. C., Mani, M., Rider, B., Rumsey, C. L., Wahls, R.
    A., Morrison, J. H., Brodersen, O. P., Crippa, S., Mavriplis, D. J., and Murayama, M., “Summary of Data from the
    Fifth Computational Fluid Dynamics Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1194-1213
61. Morrison, J. H., “Statistical Analysis of the Fifth Drag Prediction Workshop Computational Fluid Dynamics
    Solutions,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1214-1222
62. Sclafani, A. J., Vassberg, J. C., Winkler, C., Dorgan, A. J., Mani, M., Olsen, M. E., and Coder, J. G., “Analysis of
    the Common Research Model Using Structured and Unstructured Meshes,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1223-
    1243
63. Murayama, M., Yamamoto, K., Hashimoto, A., Ishida, T., Ueno, M., Tanaka, K., and Ito, Y., “Japan Aerospace
    Exploration Agency Studies for the Fifth AIAA Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of
    Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1244-1267
64. Park, M. A., Laflin, K. R., Chaffin, M. S., Powell, N., and Levy, D. W., “CFL3D, FUN3D, and NSU3D
    Contributions to the Fifth Drag Prediction Workshop,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1268-1283
65. Ceze, M. and Fidkowski, K. J., “Drag Prediction Using Adaptive Discontinuous Finite Elements,” Journal of
    Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1284-1294
66. Hue, D., “Fifth Drag Prediction Workshop: Computational Fluid Dynamics Studies Carried Out at ONERA,”
    Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1295-1310
67. Hue, D., “Fifth Drag Prediction Workshop: ONERA Investigations with Experimental Wing Twist and
    Laminarity,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014 51:4, 1311-1322
68. Keye, S., Brodersen, O., and Rivers, M. B., “Investigation of Aeroelastic Effects on the NASA Common Research
    Model,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1323-1330
69. Eberhardt, S., Benedict, K., Hedges, L., Robinson, A., and Tinoco, E. N.,"Inclusion of Aeroelastic Twist into the
    CFD Analysis of the Twin-Engine NASA Common Research Model,” AIAA Paper 2014-0251, National Harbor,
    MD, January 2014.
70. Togiti, V., Eisfeld, B., and Brodersen, O., “Turbulence Model Study for the Flow Around the NASA Common
    Research Model,” Journal of Aircraft, 2014, 51:4, 1331-1343
71. Special Section: Drag Prediction Workshops IV and V, Journal of Aircraft, Volume 51, Number 4, July-August
    2014.
72. 6th AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, Washington DC, June 2016, http://aiaa-dpw.larc.nasa.gov, accessed
    23 November 2016.
73. Roy, C. J., et al, “Summary of Data from the Sixth AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop: Case 1 Code
    Verification,” AIAA Paper 2017-xxxx, 55th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, AIAA Science and Technology
    Forum and Exposition 2017, Grapevine, TX, January 2017.
74. Derlaga, J. M. and Morrison, J. H., “ Statistical Analysis of CFD Solutions from the Sixth AIAA Drag Prediction
    Workshop,” AIAA-2017-XXX, 55th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, AIAA Science and Technology Forum
    and Exposition 2017, Grapevine, TX, January 2017


                                                       22
                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
75. Keye, S. and Mavriplis, D., “Summary of Data from the Sixth AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop: Case 5
    (Coupled Aero-Structural Simulation),” AIAA Paper 2017-XXXX, 55th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting,
    AIAA Science and Technology Forum and Exposition 2017, Grapevine, TX, January 2017
76. Rivers, M. and Dittberner, A., “Experimental Investigations of the NASA Common Research Model,” AIAA
    Paper 2010-4218, 28th AIAA Applied Aerodynamics Conference, Chicago, IL, June 2010.
77. Rivers, M. and Dittberner, A., “Experimental Investigations of the NASA Common Research Model in the NASA
    Langley National Transonic Facility and NASA Ames 11-Ft Transonic Wind Tunnel (Invited),” AIAA Paper
    2011-1126, presented at the 49th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan 2011.
78. Common Research Model, http://commonresearchmodel.larc.nasa.gov/, accessed 23 November 2016.
79. European Commission (EU), “European Strategic Wind Tunnels Improved Research Potential,”
    http://www.eswirp.aero/, accessed 23 November 2016.
80. ETW CRM wind tunnel test data, http://www.eswirp.eu/ETW-TNA-Dissemination.html, accessed 23 November
    2016.
81. Cartieri A., Hue D., and Chanzy Q, “Experimental Investigations on the Common Research Model at ONERA-S1
    – Comparison with DPW Numerical Results", AIAA Paper 2017-XXXX, 55th AIAA Aerospace Sciences
    Meeting, AIAA Science and Technology Forum and Exposition 2017, Grapevine, TX, January 2017.
82. Ueno, M., Kohzai, T., and Koga, S., “Transonic Wind Tunnel Test of the NASA CRM (Volume 1),” JAXA-RM-
    13-01E, March 2013.
83. Keye, S. and Gammon, M. R., “Development of Deformed CAD Geometries of NASA's Common Research
    Model for the 6th AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,” AIAA Paper 2016-3431, 34th AIAA Applied
    Aerodynamics Conference, June 2016.
84. Martineau, D., Stokes, S., Munday, S., Jackson, A., Gribben, B., and Verhoeven, N., “Anisotropic Hybrid Mesh
    Generation for Industrial RANS Applications,” AIAA Paper 2006-0534, Jan. 2006.
85. König, B., and Fares, E., “Validation of a Transonic Lattice-Boltzmann Method on the NASA Common Research
    Model,” AIAA 2016-2023, January 2016.
86. Venkatakrishnan, V., Allmaras, S.R., Kamenetskii, D., and Johnson, F.T., “Higher Order Schemes for the
    Compressible Navier-Stokes Equations,” AIAA Paper 2003-3987, 16th AIAA Computational Fluid Dynamics
    Conference, June 23–26, 2003, Orlando, FL.
87. Glasby, R. S. , Erwin, J. T., Stefanski, D. L., Allmaras, S. R., Galbraith, M. C., Anderson, W. K., and Nichols, R.
    H., “Introduction to COFFE: The Next-Generation HPCMP CREATETM-AV CFD Solver,” AIAA Paper 2016-
    0567, 54th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, AIAA SciTech, January 2016.
88. Buning, P. G. and Pulliam, T. H., “Near-Body Grid Adaption for Overset Grids,” June 2016.
89. Michael, T., and Krakos, J., “Anisotropic Mesh Adaptation Through Edge Primitive Operations,” AIAA Paper
    2012-159, January 2012.
90. Rivers, M. and Hunter, C., “Support System Effects on the NASA Common Research Model,” AIAA Paper 2012-
    707, January 2012.
91. Rivers, M., Hunter, C., and Campbell, R., “Further Investigation of the Support System Effects and Wing Twist on
    the NASA Common Research Model,” AIAA Paper 2012-3209, June 2012.




                                 Table 1. Reference quantities for the CRM.
      Sref    594,720.0 in2    = 4,130 ft2   [458.89 m2]                xref   1,325.9 in [33.68 m]
      Strap   576,000.0 in2    = 4,000 ft2   [444.44 m2]                yref   468.75 in [11.91 m]
      b       2,313.5 in       = 192.8 ft    [58.765 m]                 zref   177.95 in [4.520 m]
      cref    275.800 in       = 16.07 ft    [4.8978 m]                 c/4   35.0
      AR      9.0                                                             0.275




                                                       23
                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                 Table 2. Gridding Guidelines for DPW-VI.

•   Grid Family Names: Tiny, Coarse, Medium, Fine, Extra-fine, Ultra-fine
•   Tiny Grid
        •    Viscous Wall Spacing: Y+ ~ 1.0 → ∆y1 = 0.001478”
        •    At Least 2 Constantly-Spaced Cells at Viscous Walls, ∆y2 = ∆y1
        •    Growth Rates < 1.2X Normal to Viscous Walls
        •    Wing Spanwise Spacing < 0.1%*Semispan at Root, Engine & Tip
        •    WNP Chordwise Spacing < 0.1%*C (local chord) at LE & TE
        •    Wing & Nacelle TE Base >> 8 Cells [Pylon TE is Sharp]
        •    Spacing Near Fuselage Nose & Afterbody < 1%*Cref
•   Grow Next-Finer Grid in Family by ~ 1.5X in Size
        •    Scale Dimensions in All Three Computational Directions by ~ 1.15X
        •    Grid Spacings Reduce by 0.87=(1/1.15) per Mesh Level
                   •    0.1% in Tiny → [T,C,M,F,X,U] = [0.100, 0.087, 0.076, 0.066, 0.057, 0.050]%
•   WB Grids Consistent with Those within WBNP Systems
        •    Helps Minimize Deltas due to Grid → Better NP-Deltas
•   WBNP Grid Sizes ~ 1.3X-1.5X WB Grid Sizes, with Medium WB Mesh ~ 45 M-DOFs
        •    Pick Factor, Then Keep Constant Throughout Grid Family
•   Farfield Boundary > 100*Semispans
        •    Note: This is Farther than before, which was 100*Crefs
•   Miscellaneous Notes:
        •    Try to be Multigrid Friendly on Structured Meshes
        •    Store Grid Coordinates in 64-bit Precision
        •    If Storing Grids in Plot3D Format, Keep Zones < 33M Nodes
        •    Itemize Surface Elements by Components [W, B, N, P, Sym, Far]
        •    Itemize Element Count for Unstructured Meshes
                   •    Volume: Tetrahedra, Prisms, Pyramids, Hexahedra
                   •    Surface: Triangles, Quads
•   WB Grids Consistent with Those within WBNP Systems
        •    Helps Minimize Deltas due to Grid → Better NP-Deltas
•   WBNP Grid Sizes ~ 1.3X-1.5X WB Grid Sizes
        •    Pick Factor, Then Keep Constant Throughout Grid Family
•   Farfield Boundary > 100*Semispans
        •    Note: This is Farther than before, which was 100*Crefs
•   Miscellaneous Notes:
        •    Try to be Multigrid Friendly on Structured Meshes
        •    Store Grid Coordinates in 64-bit Precision
        •    If Storing Grids in Plot3D Format, Keep Zones < 33M Nodes
        •    Itemize Surface Elements by Components [W, B, N, P, Sym, Far]
        •    Itemize Element Count for Unstructured Meshes
                   •    Volume: Tetrahedra, Prisms, Pyramids, Hexahedra
                   •    Surface: Triangles, Quads

                                  Table 3. Overset Grid Family Statistics.
                       Viscous                              Maximum
      Grid                                  ~ Y+                                WB Size              WBNP Size
                       Spacing                              Stretching

      Tiny            0.001478              1.02               1.235           7,398,176             11,865,177
     Coarse           0.001182              0.80               1.186           14,355,678            22,999,565
    Medium            0.0009853             0.67               1.149           24,698,828            39,542,953
      Fine            0.0008446             0.58               1.128           39,098,858            62,566,221
    Extra-fine        0.0007390             0.50               1.112           58,227,000            93,176,522
    Ultra-fine        0.0006569             0.45               1.099           82,754,486            132,381,764


                                                     24
                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
             Table 4. NASA GeoLab Wing-Body Grid Refinement Family Statistics.




     Table 5. NASA GeoLab Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon Grid Refinement Family Statistics.




         Table 6. NASA GeoLab Wing-Body Aeroelastic Sweep Grid Family Statistics.




              Table 7. Grid resolution DLR Solar grids (GG: gridding guidelines).

                     WB                   WBNP
  Name                                                         Δy1 [in]
                GG        Solar      GG       Solar
 Tiny (T)       20        7.15     25 – 30     11.8           0.001478
Coarse (C)      30        14.1     40 – 45     23.2           0.001285
Medium (M)      45        26.8     60 – 70     44.9           0.001118
 Fine (F)       70        39.7     85 – 100    81.1           0.000972




                                               25
                       American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                         Table 8. CRM Cases 2-5 Participants.
Team   ID   SYM            Name                         Organization                      Code               Grid         Turbulence Model

       A1    A                                   Boeing, BCA Advanced Concepts,       Overflow v2.2k       Overset                SA-RC
 1                       Tony Sclafani
       A2    a                                            Long Beach CA               Overflow v2.2k       Overset            SA-RC w/QCR on
       B1    B                                                                         FUN3D 12.8        Unst-Geolab     k-kL-MEAH2015 w/Limiter
 2     B2    b       Khaled Abdol-Hamid           NASA Langley Research Center         FUN3D 12.8        Unst-Geolab     k-kL-MEAH2015 no-limiter
       B3    a                                                                         FUN3D 12.8        Unst-Geolab           SA no-limiter
       D1    D                                                                           Mflow           Unst-Geolab                SA
 3                      Jiangtao Chen                         CARDC
       D2    d                                                                           Mflow           Unst-custom                SA
 4     E1    E        Atsushi Hashimoto               JAXA, Ryoyu Systems                FaSTAR          Unst-Geolab      SA-noft2-R w/QCR2000
 5     F1    F           Krishna Zore                         Ansys                       Fluent         Unst-custom               SST
 6     G1    G          Benedikt König                  EXA Powerflow                  PowerFLOW          Custom Cart             LBM-VLES
       H1    H                                    Aerospace Research and Test              Edge           Unst-Geolab                 SA
 7                Ales Prachar/Peter Eliasson
       H2    h                                        Establishment, FOI                   Edge           Unst-Geolab               EARSM
       I1    I                                                                           FloEFD           Custom Cart    Default k-e Lam-Bremhorst
 8     I2    b         Anna Rubekinak                    Mentor Graphics                 FloEFD           Custom Cart    Subgrid k-e Lam-Bremhorst
       I3    c                                                                           FloEFD          Custom Cart-B   Default k-e Lam-Bremhorst
       J1    J                                                                            CFD++           Unst-Boeing                 SA
       J2    J                                                                            CFD++           Unst-Boeing                SST
 9           j
                          Brian Edge                        Metacomp
       J3                                                                                 CFD++           Unst-Geolab                 SA
       J4    W                                                                            CFD++           Unst-custom       Realizable k-epsilon
       K1    K                                                                            Cflow           Unst-Boeing              SA-noft2
       K2    k                                                                            Cflow           Unst-Boeing       SA-noft2 w/QCR200
 10          g           Taku Nagata                Kawasaki Heavy Industries
       K3                                                                                 Cflow           Custom Cart              SA-noft2
       K4    G                                                                            Cflow           Custom Cart       SA-noft2 w/QCR200
       L1    L      Stefan Keye / Vamshi                                                   TAU            Unst-custom               RSM-ω
 11          l                                                 DLR
       L2                   Togiti                                                         TAU            Unst-custom               SA-neg
       M1    M                                    Tennessee, Pointwise, NASA           COFFE/KCFD         Unst-custom               SA-neg
 12                     Ryan S. Glasby
       M2    m                                    Langley, NAVAIR, MIT, U Ala          COFFE/KCFD         Unst-custom       SA-neg w/QCR2000
 13    N1    N         N. Balakrishnan            CAd Lab, Indian Institute of Sci        HiFun          Unst-custom               SA
       O1    O                                                                             elsA            Overset                 SA
 14          f
                          David Hue                           ONERA
       O2                                                                                  elsA            Overset             SA-QCR2000
       P1    P                                                                             BCFD          Unst-Boeing              SA-RC
 15          p
                         Todd Michal                     Boeing, St. Louis
       P2                                                                                 GGNS             All Tets               SA-RC
       Q1    Q                                                                            ADflow         Embraer MB            SA 1stOrder
 16    Q2    q         Gaetan Kenway             MDOlab, University of Michigan           ADflow         Cust-Overset          SA 1stOrder
       Q3    q                                                                            ADflow         Embraer MB            SA-QCR2000
 17    R1    R         Andrei Cimpoeru                CFMS, Zenotech, ARA                  ZCFD          Unst-custom               SST
 18    S1    S            Kelly Laflin              Textron Aviation (Cessna)             FUN3D           Unst-Geolab             SA-RC
 19    T1    T          Yuntao Wang                           CARDC                         TRIP          CommonMB               SST-2003
                                                                                     Overflow 2.21 3rd
       U1    U                                                                                             Overset           SA-RC W/QCF2000
                                                                                       Order WENO
 20                       Jim Coder             Applied Research Lab, Penn State
                                                                                     Overflow 2.21 5TH
       U2    u                                                                                             Overset           SA-RC W/QCF2000
                                                                                       Order WENO
       V1    V                                                                             CFD++          Unst-Geolab               SST
       V2    V                                                                             CFD++          Embraer MB                SST
 21          X      Rodrigo Felix de Souza                 Embraer S/A
       V3                                                                                  CFD++         Unst-custom-A              SST
       V4    Y                                                                             CFD++         Unst-custom-I              SST
 22    W1    W         Dominic Chandar            Institute of High Performance            μSICS          Unst-custom               SA
 23    X1    X          Patrick Hanley                 Hanley Innovations               Stallion3D        Custom Cart               k-e
                                                      University of Oxford,
 24    Y1    Y           Neil Ashton                                                    OpenFOAM         Unst-custom                SA
                                                  ESI Group, BETA CAE Systems
       Z1    Z                                                                        TAS limiter K=1    Unst-Geolab      SA-noft2-R w/QCR2000
       Z2    z                                                                        TAS limiter K=5    Unst-Geolab      SA-noft2-R w/QCR2000
       Z3    D                                                                       TAS limiter K=10    Unst-Geolab      SA-noft2-R w/QCR2000
 25    Z4    e            Yasushi Ito                 JAXA, Ryoyu Systems            TAS limiter K=10    Unst-custom      SA-noft2-R w/QCR2000
       Z5    h                                                                        TAS limiter K=5    Unst-Geolab            SA-noft2-R
       Z6    P                                                                        TAS limiter K=5    Unst-Boeing            SA-noft2-R
       Z7    U                                                                        TAS limiter K=5    Unst-Boeing      SA-noft2-R w/QCR2000




                                                26
                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
          Table 9. Overview of aeroelastic Simulation Methods used for Test Case 5.

                                                     Dataset Key
                           J4                  L2                  T1                   V5
Coupling              linear static       linear static       linear static        linear modal
Approach
Flow Solver          Finite-Volume       Finite-Volume         Finite-Volume      Finite-Volume
Solver Name              CFD++                TAU                   TRIP           CMS AERO-F
Turbulence           realizable k-          SA-neg              SST-2003          SA-QCR2013
Model
Structural Solver    Finite-Element     Finite-Element        Finite-Element      Finite-Element
Model Suspension       Wing Root       Balance Interface        Wing Root        Center of Gravity
Force               Nearest-Neighbor   Nearest-Neighbor      Thin Plate Spline   Nearest-Neighbor
Interpolation            Search             Search                                    Search
Algorithm
Mesh                  Radial Basis        Radial Basis          Radial Basis     linear Torsional
Deformation            Functions           Functions             Functions        Spring Analogy
Method




        Figure 1. NASA Common Research Model (CRM) geometry for DPW-V cases 2-5.




                                                                                              ~ CL=0.50



    Figure 2. Static Aeroelastic Twist Distributions Derived from Wing Tunnel Measurements.
                                                27
                        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                      Case 3: Wing-Body Wing Pressue Distributions
                                                              Case 3: Wing-Body Wing Pressue Distributions
                              Aeroelastic vs. Rigid "as-built"        Aeroelastic vs. Rigid "as-built"
                                    M=0.85, AOA=3.0                         M=0.85, AOA=3.0

elastic                                                  Static Aeroelastic
uilt"                                -1.2
                                       -1.2              RigidEta=0.846
                                                               "as-built"                                        -1.2
                                                                                                                   -1.2
                                                                                                                                          Eta=0.950
                                                                                                                                           Eta=0.846                                   -1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Eta=
alpha=3.10_CL=0.5523                                     Eta=0.727_alpha=3.10_CL=0.5523                                                                                        Symbols - Test Data
                                         -1-1                                        -1-1                                                                                                -1 Unstructured
          Eta=0.727                                    Case 3: Wing-Body
                                                                   Eta=0.727Wing Pressue Distributions                                                                                      Custom Unst
                                     -0.8
                                       -0.8                             All Solutions
                                                                                  -0.8
                                                                                    -0.8                                                                                              -0.8 Overset
                                                                                                                                                                                            Multiblock

                                     -0.6
                                       -0.6
                                                                    M=0.85, AOA=2.75
                                                                                  -0.6
                                                                                    -0.6                                                                                               -0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                            Custom Cart

                                                         Eta=0.131                                                           Eta=0.201                                                Eta=0.286
                                     -0.4
                                  -1.2 -0.4                                                             -1.2     -0.4
                                                                                                                   -0.4                                              -1.2              -0.4
                                   Cp
                                   Cp




                                                                                                                Cp
                                                                                                                Cp




                                                                                                                                                                                      Cp
                                   -1                                                                      -1                                                         -1
                                     -0.2
                                       -0.2                                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                   -0.2                                                                -0.2
                                  -0.8                                                                  -0.8                                                         -0.8
                                          00                                                                        00                                                                     0
                                  -0.6                                                                  -0.6                                                         -0.6
                                         0.2
                                          0.2                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                   0.2                                                                  0.2
                           Cp




                                                                                                     Cp




                                                                                                                                                                Cp
                                  -0.4                                                                  -0.4                                                         -0.4

                                         0.4
                                          0.4                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                   0.4                                                                  0.4
                                  -0.2                                                                  -0.2                                                         -0.2

                                         0.6
                                          0.6                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                   0.6                                                                  0.6
    0.6     0.8       1             0
                                           00          0.2
                                                        0.2      0.4
                                                                  0.4       0.6
                                                                             0.6         0.8
                                                                                          0.8        11 0               00         0.2
                                                                                                                                    0.2   0.4
                                                                                                                                           0.4    0.6
                                                                                                                                                   0.6    0.8
                                                                                                                                                           0.8 0 11                           0        0.2         0.4
C                                                        X/C
                                                           X/C                                              X/C
                                                                                                              X/C                Symbols - Test Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X
                                                                                                  Pressure Distributions – 3° Angle-of-
                                0.2                                            0.2                                         0.2
                               Figure 3. Case
                                           Impact 3:   Wing-Body
                                                   of Static  Aeroelastic Wing
                                                                          DeformationPressue
                                                                                         on WingDistributions                                  Unstructured
                                                                                                                                               Custom Unst
                                                                               0.4Attack.
                                0.4
                                    0    0.2   0.4     0.6     0.8
                                                                X/C
                                                                     All
                                                                      1    Solutions
                                                                                   0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8    1
                                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                               0   0.2
                                                                                                                                   X/C
                                                                                                                                            0.4Overset
                                                                                                                                                     0.6    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                           Multiblock
                                                                                                                                                                                            X/C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                    M=0.85, AOA=2.75                                                                                       Custom Cart

                                                       Eta=0.397
                                                       Eta=0.727                                                   Eta=0.846
                                                                                                                       Eta=0.502                                            Eta=0.950_alpha=2.86_CL=0.5182
                                                                                                                                                                                     Eta=0.603
                           -0.4-1.2                                                              -0.4 -1.2                                        Enhanced -0.4pressures
                                                                                                                                                                -1.2
                                                                                                                                                                     Eta=0.950_alpha=2.86_CL=0.5182
                                                                                                                                                  Original test-1pressures
                                  -1                                                                       -1
                                                                                                                                                  CFD solutions
                           -0.2-0.8                                                              -0.2 -0.8                                                 -0.2 -0.8


                               -0.6                                                                     -0.6                                                         -0.6
                          Cp




                                                                                                Cp
                                                                                                     Cp




                                                                                                                                                                Cp
                          Cp




                                                                                                                                                          Cp
                               -0.4
                                0                                                                    0 -0.4                                                     0 -0.4


                               -0.2                                                                     -0.2                                                         -0.2


                           0.2     0                                                              0.2      0                                                   0.2     0             Eta=0.950

                               0.2                                                                        0.2                                                        0.2


                           0.4 0.4                                                                0.4 0.4 0                                                    0.4 0.4
                             0.8  0             0.2
                                                0.85     0.4
                                                          0.9         0.60.95 0.8    1   1          0.8           0.2
                                                                                                                0.85         0.4
                                                                                                                             0.9X/C 0.60.95 0.8   1   1          0.8 0         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                             0.85      0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9       0.6 0.95   0.8   1   1
                                                          X/C X/C                                                                                                                       X/CX/C
                                                                                                                             X/C
                                                          Figure 4. Enhancement of Wing Tunnel Pressure Measurements.




                                                                                                  28
                                                                          American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
    Figure 5. Topology of Overset Near-Field Grid Blocks and Nacelle-Pylon Grid Blocks.




       a. WBNP Surface Grids                              b. Nacelle/Pylon Surface Grids
Figure 6. Close-Up of WBNP Surface and Nacelle/Pylon Surface Grids for the Medium Overset
                                         Mesh.




   a. WB Collar Grid           b. O-Mesh Abutting the Wing                 c. Wingtip Clamp Grid
                                              29
                      American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
Figure 7. Close-Up of Overset Features for Medium Overset Mesh.




Figure 8. Close-Up of NASA GeoLab Unstructured Surface Meshes.




  Figure 9. Close-Up of DLR Solar Unstructured Surface Mesh.




                                30
        American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                        Case 2: CD_TOT - Wing-Body
                                             All Solutions by Grid Type and Turbulence Model

                          Grid Type                                                           Turbulence Model
   0.036                        Unstructured                                                0.036     SA
                                Custom Unst                                                           SA QCR
                                Overset                                                               SST
                                Multiblock                                                           k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B                             
   0.034                        Custom Cart                                                 0.034 EARSM,
                                                                                                      LBM-VLES
                                                                                                                 RSM-w

                                                 S                                                                                           S

   0.032                                                                                    0.032
                             G                                                                                         G
 CD_TOT




                                                                                          CD_TOT
                       G                                                                                        G
          0.03        G                                                                            0.03        G
                     G                                                                                        G
                    G                                       I                                                G                                         I

   0.028                         5 Counts I                                                 0.028                      5 Counts          I
                             FF F                                                                                      FF F
                         F                                                                                      F                                                 
                                           k k K    k                                                                                 k k K   k 
                                                                                                                                             
                     F                                                                                       F                                                      
                               KkK
                                  k K k K K                              T                                           KkK
                                                                                                                               k K  k K K                            T
                                                                                                                                                   
                                 
                                                   J d                    aL                                                                  J d                   AL
                       h  Z
                            D  B    Jd Q     d   H                                                       h    h
                                                                                                                       D   B      Jd     d   H                     
                               
   0.026                D
                        
                        Z       dJH
                                 
                                 Z    
                                      Z    JHS
                                              L
                                                J    
                                                       T aL
                                                      Z                                    0.026                 D
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  Z    
                                                                                                                       Z      dJH
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              Z     
                                                                                                                                    Z    J S
                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                         H
                                                                                                                                              J 
                                                                                                                                                Q 
                                                                                                                                                    T AL
                                                                                                                                                   Z       
                             
                                J             Z       b                                                                     J              Z       b
                              P             b
                                                           u               A                                                           b
                                                                                                                                                        u              A
                           
                        TB                                                                                     T
                                      b                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                        P
                                     S
                                   TQB   aqPB   P   QB     q  M                                                                S
                                                                                                                                  B       B P          q  M 
                         
                      H                                                                                                                         B
                                                   P  A                                                          B                        P  A
                     D     h    b                                                                           D              b  
                              aQH           V                           uq                                              H        
                                                                                                                                       qPQV                          uq
                   D Bb   b
                            PA
                            H    h   E           aq                       M U                              D B b    b
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                       H      h TQ V          A                       M U
                        E
                        QE 
                            V
                                 S
                                 E
                                 U
                                 VAa
                                   P
                                   q
                                   u  h
                                      
                                      VPOU
                                         u
                                         A    
                                              h A
                                              E   U
                                                  u   E
                                                      V    U                 O                                  HE
                                                                                                                  Q   E
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       V AQ
                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                              A
                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                              VU
                                                                                                                               AP
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                u   h
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                    EPOA
                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                       u
                                                                                                                                       A   
                                                                                                                                           h A
                                                                                                                                           E   U
                                                                                                                                               uq  E
                                                                                                                                                   V    U                O
                       N    N NO N N O h              N    O                                                    N      N NO N N O h                N    O
                         100M 50M               20M                10M                                             100M 50M               20M                  10M
   0.024                                                                                    0.024
        0                           1E-05                    2E-05               3E-05           0                            1E-05                     2E-05                3E-05
                                              GRIDFAC
                                       Case 2: CD_PR - Wing-Body           GRIDFAC
          Figure 10. Case 2:All
                            CRM Solutions
                                  WB totalby Grid
                                          drag    Type
                                               by grid   and
                                                       type andTurbulence   ModelM=0.85, CL=0.50.
                                                                turbulence model,


  0.02                                                           Grid Type
                                                                       Unstructured
                                                                                           0.02                                                            Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                                                   SA
                                                                       Custom Unst                                                                                 SA QCR
                                                                       Overset                                                                                     SST
                                                                       Multiblock                                                                                  k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B
                         G                                             Custom Cart                                 G                                               EARSM, RSM-w
                    G                                                                                        G                                                     LBM-VLES
0.018              G                                                                     0.018              G
                  G                                                                                        G                            5 Counts
                 G                         5 Counts                                                       G



                              F                                                                                         F
0.016                    FF                                                             0.016                     FF                      
                                                               I                                                                                           I
                      F                 k k k                                                                F                    k k k                            
CD_PR




                                                                                         CD_PR




                               k    k    k     b
                                             H KN
                                                       b
                                                       
                                                       H                 LT                                             k   k     k     b
                                                                                                                                          H KN
                                                                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   H                 LT
                   F              H        B     IB                                                     F                 H        B                    
                             
                                                      h                                                                                          h 
                                                              L                                                                                          L
                                       b K
                                       h       hK                           a                                                      b K
                                                                                                                                   h       hK    IB
                                                                                                                                                                      A
                           
                               Kh              VL   J                                                                     h B          VL
                      hDhDH             N            V d                                                               H                    J
                                                                                                                                                   V d
                                                                                                                          K
                         
                                    B                                     A                                                        N                            A
                       
                                 bK    K                                                                        hDhD        bK    K
                     
                                                                                                                                                        
                                 B                                                                                          B                     
                           bP
                          N
                           B     V N  V    J E
                                                 d
                                                  
                                                  J
                                                Pa P   A
                                                       
                                                           T a
                                                                           U                                  b 
                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                      b
                                                                                                                      B   N
                                                                                                                           JV   Nd
                                                                                                                                  V     J   d
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                              J
                                                                                                                                            PA P   A
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                       T A
                                                                                                                                                                       U
                                    T E                     u                                                               T E                      u 
                   DD           N      P                                   u                               DD                     P                                   u
                               E                 u QE   U                                                                                          U
                                                      Z                                                                                      u QE
                                                                                                                                                   Z
                           PA                                                                                       PA
                      B                   aP
                                        Jd                                                                                         JA
                      TE
                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                TE
                      b    V  aJ dU
                                   aP          
                                               Z                                                                      V      dA      u PE 
                                                                                                                                           Z
                     N    H     
                                 Z  J  Z  U
                                          u        U                                                          N      H   P
                                                                                                                         AA
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                             Z J
                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                               U   Z  U        U
                                 AQA                                                                                          QA
                                                   A                                                                                           A
                  H                                                                                    H
                      E
                      
                      Z    
                           Z       u       Q q              q              q                                 E
                                                                                                                Z     
                                                                                                                      Z        u       Q q              q              q
0.014                 Q Q q q                              O              O            0.014                  Q Q q q                                O              O
                                   O O             O                                                                           O O             O


                      100M 50M               20M                10M                                            100M 50M                20M                   10M

0.012                                                                                    0.012
     0                            1E-05                   2E-05                3E-05          0                             1E-05                    2E-05                 3E-05
                                           GRIDFAC                                                                                   GRIDFAC
   Figure 11. Case 2: CRM WB pressure drag by grid type and turbulence model, M=0.85, CL=0.50.




                                                                              31
                                                      American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                   Case 2: CD_SF- Wing-Body
                                        All Solutions by Grid Type and Turbulence Model

0.016                                                   Grid Type
                                                              Unstructured
                                                                               0.016                                               Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                           SA
                                                              Custom Unst                                                                  SA QCR
                                                              Overset                                                                      SST
                                                              Multiblock                                                                   k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B
                                                              Custom Cart                                                                  EARSM, RSM-w
             5 Counts                                                                      5 Counts                                        LBM-VLES
0.014                                                                        0.014                                          

                                    I           I                                                                  I           I

                     G                                                                              G
0.012           G                                                              0.012            G
              G                                                                            G  
             G 
                Z
                Z   
                        dq                                                      G 
                                                                                               Z
                                                                                               Z   
                                                                                                       dq                           
                        JZ   JQZKqK                                                               JZ  JQZ KqK  
           G
            F               T                                                          G
                                                                                           F              T
             D                  JO  JQZ      Z d O                                       D                  JO JQZ      Z d O
CD_SF




                




                                                                               CD_SF
               F
                HTQD
                    F FQ
                      KF
                           OK   d      J
                                          dO
                                          
                                          K    J
                                            qQK
                                                T q
                                               
                                                              O
                                                                   q
                                                                                              
                                                                                              F
                                                                                               HTQD
                                                                                                   F FQ
                                                                                                     KF
                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                           K    d     J
                                                                                                                        dO
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                        K    J
                                                                                                                          qQK
                                                                                                                              T q
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                O
             D  D
                E
                B
                b   PA
                   H
                    E
                    B aP   A   
                               EPA    La P 
                                                                                            D  D
                                                                                               E
                                                                                               B
                                                                                               b   PA
                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                   B AP   A   
                                                                                                              EPA   Lu P 
                       
                        
                    b       aP     aP     PA        L                                             b       P      uP    PA        uL  
                     
                                                    A                                                                             A
                   
                          EU      U                                                                     EU      U      
               
                            u      u       U
                                           u                     A
                                                                  a T                                      u
                                                                                                           A             U                      uT
               h            k   k   k    k    
                                               k   u
                                                    U
                                                    a            u
                                                                  U                            h           k    kA k    k    
                                                                                                                             k   U              U
                                                                                                                                                 A
                    h
                    V V kB
                         Hb B B        E       
                                               E                 L                            
                                                                                                 V 
                                                                                                   h   k
                                                                                                      VB
                                                                                                        Hb  B    
                                                                                                                    E     
                                                                                                                             E                  L
                NN        h H   b
                                V              B                                               N   N N   h H   b B
                                                                                                               V             B
                         N      h H    Vb                                                                      h H   Vb
                           N                  H
                                               b
                                               V                                                          N                 H
                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                             V
                                 N     h                                                                       N    h
                                              h
                                               N                                                                            h
                                                                                                                             N
   0.01                                        
                                                                                  0.01                                       


                100M 50M             20M               10M                                     100M 50M             20M               10M

0.008                                                                          0.008
     0                    1E-05                  2E-05                 3E-05        0                    1E-05                  2E-05                 3E-05
                                   GRIDFAC                                                                        GRIDFAC
                                      Case
         Figure 12. Case 2: CRM WB skin      2: CM
                                        friction drag- by
                                                       Wing-Body
                                                          grid type and turbulence model, M=0.85,
                         All Solutions by GridCL=0.50.
                                                 Type and Turbulence Model

-0.06                                                  Grid Type               -0.06                                               Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                           SA
                                                             Unstructured
                                                             Custom Unst                                                                   SA QCR
                                                             Overset                                                                       SST
                                                            Multiblock                                                                   k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B
                                                             Custom Cart                                                                   EARSM, RSM-w
                                                                                                                                         LBM-VLES

                                  b      b                                                                        b       b
                                  H     H                                                                         H       H
                       
                       h H b
                           h h                                                                         
                                                                                                       h H b
                                                                                                           h h
-0.08                                    h
                                                                               -0.08                                      h
                hh H   b                                                                       hh H    b
                           B B    V     BV                                                                 B B    V       V
                                                                                                                          B
                   b B V V                                                                        b B V V                
CM_TOT




                                                                               CM_TOT




                                   u       uI                                                                      u        uI
                                                                                                              u  LA
                B
                b  V
                     a U                                                                    B
                                                                                               b   V A  A
               B        U
                        u   a  LU
                              u      a       U
                                              a                   U
                                                                  u
                                                                  aL                          B         U
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        u    U       U         U
                                                                                                                                A                U
                                                                                                                                                 uL
                                                                                                                                                 A
             FF    HaFE                L                                            FF     HAFE                  L
               
               
               HE
                
                   
                  E
                Z
                   F
                   
                   
                       
                       
                      
                        F
                       
                           E     
                                  E   
                                         E  
                                             A               
                                                                 A                           
                                                                                              H E
                                                                                                 
                                                                                               
                                                                                               E
                                                                                               
                                                                                                   F
                                                                                                   PA
                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                         
                                                                                                       ZA
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                           ZA
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                 Z A
                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                           A            
                                                                                                                                                A
                       ZA Z Z I Z            
                           A       A                                                                                           
               Z  PA
                PP                                                                    Z   Z
                                                                                               P P              I Z      
            
            DDT      k  k  k
                            P   P  P
                                    k  Q N                       Oq                       
                                                                                           DDT       k  k  k
                                                                                                            P  P   P
                                                                                                                    k   Q N                     Oq
                 QDQNd
                 D      qTQNd        q P
                              q kQN dO        Oq                                               QDQNd
                                                                                                D       qTQNd q kQN dOq P       Oq                
                   N JO  J K O
                            J J K   J k     d                                                      N JO  J K O
                                                                                                            J J K   J k      d
    -0.1   GGGNG K K            K  K   J T 
                                                                                   -0.1   GGGNG K K            K  K     J T 
                                                                  T                                                                            T
                   G                                           
                                                                                                    G                                         



                100M 50M             20M               10M                                     100M 50M             20M               10M

-0.12                                                                          -0.12
     0                    1E-05                  2E-05                 3E-05        0                    1E-05                  2E-05                 3E-05
                                   GRIDFAC                                                                        GRIDFAC
         Figure 13. Case 2: CRM WB pitching moment by grid type and turbulence model, M=0.85,
                                             CL=0.50.




                                                                     32
                                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                               Case 2: CD_TOT - Wing-Body                                                                                                             Case 2: CD_TOT - Wing-Body
                                    All Solutions by Grid Type and Turbulence Model                                                                                        All Solutions by Grid Type and Turbulence Model


                 Geolab Unstructured Grids                                            Boeing Unstructured Grids                                           Custom Unstructured Grids                                                     Custom Cartesian
  0.028                                                                  0.028                                                             0.028                                                                       0.036
                                                                                                                                                               F                                                                                  Note: Change
                                                                                                                                                             FF               2 Counts                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.034
  0.027          2 Counts
                                                                         0.027        2 Counts
                                                                                                                                           0.027          F                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                  k                                                                                                                                             5 Counts
                                                                                                k 
                                                                                              k K                                                        F                                                             0.032
                                                                                         kk k K
                                                                                              K                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                         K                                                                           d                                                           G                               I
                                                                                         K
                                                                                           K     J                                                                                L




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CD_TOT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
  0.026             Z
                     DZ
                    DZ
                       B
                         Z
                          
                            
                           H 
                              Z
                              
                             H
                            Z
                            
                            b b                                          0.026           JJ J J J                                          0.026               d L
                                                                                                                                                                      d     L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.03 G
CD_TOT




                                                                         CD_TOT




                                                                                                                                         CD_TOT
                  DDh
                    bB
                      h bH
                      bH
                        B b B B                                                                                                                                  d             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                H
                    B
                    EH
                        h
                        E                                                                      PP                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                            M M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G         I
                                                                                        PPPP P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Turbulence M
                      EE  h E E
                              
                    VVV  
                           V
                            h V                                                                                                                                                                                        0.028            I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SA Q
                              h                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SST
  0.025                                                 NTF Test         0.025                                         NTF Test            0.025                                                      NTF Test
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k-e,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EAR
                                                                                                                                          0.026                                                                                                              LBM
                  100M 50M           20M         10M                                  100M50M      20M          10M
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                         100M 50M            20M             10M

                                         Case 2: CD_TOT   - Wing-Body             Case 2: CD_TOT    - Wing-Body                               100M 20M 10M 5M          2M
                                           Ames Test                                 Ames Test                                 Ames Test                      NTF Test
  0.024                       All Solutions             0.024                                     0.024                                   0.024
       0                   1E-05     2E-05 by Grid
                                                3E-05Type and0Turbulence
                                                                       AllModel
                                                                     1E-05 Solutions
                                                                               2E-05by Grid    Type
                                                                                           3E-05    and0Turbulence
                                                                                                               1E-05Model2E-05      3E-05      0              5E-05
                                    GRIDFAC                                                      GRIDFAC                                                                   GRIDFAC                                                                    GRIDFAC

                           Overset Grids                                          Custom Unstructured
                                                                                      Multiblock Grids Grids                                                Custom Cartesian Grids
  0.028                                                                  0.028
                                                                        0.028                                                              0.036
                                                                                        F                                                                              Note: Change in Scales
                                                                                      FF         2 Counts                                                        
                                                                                                                                           0.034
  0.027           2 Counts
                                                                         0.027 F2 Counts
                                                                        0.027                               
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                
                                                                              F                                                                                      5 Counts
                                                                                                                                           0.032
                                                                                                             T                                                                            
                                                                                             d                                                        G                                   I
                                                                                                             L




                                                                                                                                         CD_TOT
                                                            a
                                                                         0.026           
                                                                                             d      L        
                                                                                                                                                       G
  0.026                                                     A           0.026                 Q T 
                                                                                             L
                                                                                      d d Q
                                                                                                                                                  0.03 G
CD_TOT




                                                                     CD_TOT
                                                                     CD_TOT




                                           a                                                                                                          G
                           a                                uq                       TQ             
                                                                                       Q  
                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                 M M
                       a a                 A
                                           uq
                                           U                U                     TQ                                                                            I              Turbulence Model
                      aU
                       qO
                       u
                       A q U
                         U
                         u
                         A q
                           u
                           A
                                                            O                                                                                                                           SA
                      AO   O               O                                                                                               0.028             I                          SA QCR
                                                                                                                                                                                        SST
  0.025                                                NTF Test
                                                                         0.025
                                                                        0.025                                      NTF Test
                                                                                                                                                                                        k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B
                                                                                                                                                                                        EARSM, RSM-w
                  100M 50M           20M         10M                                100M50M
                                                                                  100M 50M         20M
                                                                                                 20M             10M
                                                                                                               10M
                                                                                                                       NTF Test
                                                                                                                                           0.026
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                     LBM-VLES

                                                                                                                                                     100M 20M 10M 5M                       2M                 1M
                                                       Ames Test                                                  Ames
                                                                                                                   AmesTest
                                                                                                                         Test                                                   NTF Test
  0.024                                                                  0.024
                                                                        0.024                                                              0.024
       0                   1E-05            2E-05               3E-05        00              1E-05
                                                                                            1E-05          2E-05
                                                                                                          2E-05              3E-05
                                                                                                                            3E-05               0                               5E-05                       0.0001
                                Case 2: CD_TOT - Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon
                                    GRIDFAC          GRIDFAC
                                                    GRIDFAC                        GRIDFAC
                             All
           Figure 14. Case 2: CRMSolutions
                                   WB totalby Grid
                                           drag    Type
                                                by grid    and
                                                        type andTurbulence   ModelM=0.85, CL=0.50.
                                                                 turbulence model,

                                                                        Grid Type
 0.034                                                                        Unstructured            0.034                                                                   Turbulence Model
                                                                              Custom Unst                                                                                             SA
                       G                                                                                                   G                                                          SA QRC
                                                                              Overset
                                                                              Multiblock                                                                                              SST
                      G                                                       Custom Cart                               G                                                             k-e, k-kl, k-e LamB
                                                                                                                                                                                      EARSM, RSM-w
                   G                                                                                                   G                                                              LBM-VLES
 0.032                                                                                                0.032
                  G                                                                                                G

                                                                                                                                                   

                                F                                                                                                  F                            
                           FF       5 Counts                                                                                   FF       5 Counts
         0.03                                                                                            0.03
                       F                                                                                                   F
  CD_TOT




                                                                                                      CD_TOT




                   F                     k
                                                                                                                      F                   k
                                                                                                                                           
                          kK k K  k k K                                                                                    kK k K  k k K
                            K k   K                                                                                        K k   K
                         DK
                          J  J  
                                J J  J J d                                                                                 DK
                                                                                                                            J  J  
                                                                                                                                  J J  J J d
                    DD           d
                                     d
                                                                                                                     DD           d
                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                                                                                        
                                  Bb B b                                        M                                                 Bb B b                                                        M
                        b                                                                                               b
                            bd
                            B   B                                M                                                            bd
                                                                                                                              B   B                                       M
 0.028               b
                 H
                     B B
                         H    H  H
                               H
                                b                                        M                            0.028            b
                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                       B B
                                                                                                                           H    H  H
                                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                  b                                                   M
                     
                     HE   E E E  O   EN                                                                             
                                                                                                                       HE   E E E  O   EN
                     NN O   N O N N        O                                                                           NN O   N O N N        O



 0.026                                                                                                0.026
      0                              1E-05                       2E-05                3E-05                0                              1E-05                          2E-05                          3E-05
                                                GRIDFAC                                                                                                 GRIDFAC
     Figure 15. Case 2: CRM WBNP total drag by grid type and turbulence model, M=0.85, CL=0.50.




                                                                                 33
                                                         American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                       Case 2: CD_TOT - Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon  minus
                                                              Case     Wing-Body
                                                                   2: CD_TOT  - Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon minus Wing-Body
                               Solutions by Grid Type and Turbulence Model
                                                                      Solutions by Grid Type and Turbulence Model

                     Geolab Unstructrued Grids                                                 Custom
                                                                                              Boeing   Cartesian Grids
                                                                                                     Unstructured Grids                                                     Custom Unstructured Grids
      0.0035                                                                   0.0035
                                                                              0.0035                                                                         0.0035               Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                                                                          SA
                                                           B    B1                                                                  GJ       G1 J1
                                                                                                                                                                                          SA QRC                      d     D2
                                                           b    B2                                                                  I       I1 J2                                       SST                         F     F1
                                                           D    D1                             G                                    K       I2 K1                                        k-e, k-kl                   L     L1
                                                           E    E1                                                                   k      K3 K2                                        LBM-VLES                         L2
          0.003
                                      1 Count
                                                           H    H1                 0.003
                                                                                  0.003       G                 1 1Count
                                                                                                                    Count
                                                                                                                                    P       K4 P1                  0.003                 EARSM, RSM-w                M     M1
                                                           V    V1                                                                                                                                                    N     N1
                                                           Z    Z1                                                                                                             FF                                          V3
                     D                                         Z2
                                                                                                                                                                             F F                                           V4
                                                               Z3                           JJ                                                                             F                                             Z4
                   DD                                                                       JKkJ
                                                                                                 JJ                                                                                    L
                                                                                                 I
DeltaCD




                                                                          DeltaCD
                                                                          DeltaCD




                                                                                                                                                       DeltaCD
                                                                                                                                                                                  ddd      M
                                                                                                                                                                                             
      0.0025                                                                   0.0025
                                                                              0.0025                                                                         0.0025                           L
                                                                                      G    K
                                                                                            k
                                                                                            
                                                                                                K                                                                                ddN L                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                         PP P P
                                                                                                  k                                                                               dN        L
                     BBB
                       ZBB
                       bV
                          BB
                           Z
                           
                         bE
                         Z                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                              NNN     L  
                                                                                                                                                                                         L
                     H
                     
                     Z
                     b
                     H
                      Z
                      b
                      V
                      H
                       b
                       V 
                         b b
                          EH                                                                                      I                                                                     
                     EEEH
                        EH
                         EHV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 Count
          0.002                                                                    0.002
                                                                                  0.002                                                                             0.002
                  Wind Tunnel                                                            WindTunnel
                                                                                        Wind  Tunnel                  I                                                     Wind Tunnel


      0.0015           Case 2: CD_TOT - Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon
                                                         0.0015
                                                        0.0015       minus Wing-Body                                                                         0.0015                Case 2: CD_TOT - Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon minus Wing
            0             1E-05 Solutions
                                      2E-05 by Grid
                                                  3E-05        0       1E-05
                                                    Type and 0Turbulence
                                                                      1E-05      2E-05
                                                                          Model 2E-05                                                          3E-05
                                                                                                                                              3E-05                0                 1E-05 Solutions
                                                                                                                                                                                               2E-05 by Grid
                                                                                                                                                                                                          3E-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Type and Turbulence Model
                                     Gridfac                                                                  Gridfac
                                                                                                             Gridfac                                                                          Gridfac
                     Overset Grids                                                            Multiblock Structured Grids                                                         Custom Cartesian Grids                                               Custom Unstructure
      0.0035                                                                      0.0035                                                                         0.0035                                                                    0.0035          Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SA
                                                           A    A1                                                                       Q     Q1                                                                     G     G1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SA QRC
                                                           a    A2                                                                       T     T1                                                                     I     I1                                    SST
                                                           O    O1                                                                                                                G                                        I2                                     k-e, k-kl
                                                           q    Q2                                                                                                                                                         K3                                     LBM-VLES
          0.003
                     1 Count
                                                           U    U1                    0.003
                                                                                                1 Count
                                                                                                                                                                    0.003      G                1 Count
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           K4                 0.003               EARSM, RSM
                                                           u    U2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F F
                                                                                                        QQQ                                                                                                                                             F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                      QQ
                                                                                                      Q                                                                                                                                                           
DeltaCD




                                                                            DeltaCD




                                                                                                                                                          DeltaCD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DeltaCD
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                    A                                                                                         T                                                                                                                                        
      0.0025
                                  A a                                             0.0025
                                                                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                 0.0025
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                I                                          0.0025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ddd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L
                                  a q
                                a q
                              a A
                                                                                                                                                                              G      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ddN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dN        L
                                                                                                                                                                                  
                            aA  q                                                                 TTT T T T                                                                                                                                                              
                          A
                          aOA
                            q q                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NN     L L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                              O     U                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N        
                            U
                            uU  u U
                              u U u u                                                                                                                                                               I
          0.002                                                                       0.002                                                                         0.002                                                                      0.002
                  Wind Tunnel                                                                 Wind Tunnel                                                                   Wind Tunnel                                                                Wind Tunnel
                                                                                                                                                                                                        I

      0.0015                                                                      0.0015                                                                         0.0015                                                                    0.0015
            0               1E-05                2E-05          3E-05                   0                 1E-05                 2E-05          3E-05                   0                1E-05                 2E-05          3E-05               0             1E-05
                                     Gridfac                                                                    Gridfac                                                                        Gridfac                                                               Gridfac
  Figure 16. Case 2: CRM WBNP  – Wing-Body
                         Case 2: WB drag increment
                                           PressurebyDistributions
                                                      grid type and turbulence model, M=0.85,
                                          CL=0.50.History
                                 Grid Convergence
                                                                                              M=0.85, CL=0.50
                                                 P1 Grid Level L1                           Boeing Unstructured Grid
                  Eta=0.131                      P1 Grid Level L4                                         Eta=0.502                                                                      Eta=0.846
    -1.2                                         P1 Grid Level L7               -1.2                                                                             -1.2
                                                 Ames W.T. Data
                                                 Test a=2.60, CL=0.4818
                                                 Test a=2.86, CL=0.5182
    -0.8                                                                        -0.8                                                                             -0.8


    -0.4                                                                        -0.4                                                                             -0.4
Cp




                                                                             Cp




                                                                                                                                                                 Cp




          0                                                                           0                                                                               0


      0.4                                                                         0.4                                                                               0.4

            0       0.2        0.4         0.6       0.8       1                        0       0.2       0.4             0.6      0.8        1                        0       0.2       0.4            0.6      0.8        1
                                     X/C                                                                        X/C                                                                            X/C
          Figure 17. Case 2:K4CRM        WB wing pressure
                               Grid Level L1
                                                                        – grid convergence, M=0.85, CL=0.50.
                                                          distributionsGrid
                                                  Custom Unstructured
                Eta=0.131                        K4 Grid Level L2                                         Eta=0.502                                                                      Eta=0.846
    -1.2                                         K4 Grid Level L4
                                                                                -1.2                                                                             -1.2
                                                 Ames W.T. Data
                                                 Test a=2.60, CL=0.4818
                                                 Test a=2.86, CL=0.5182
    -0.8                                                                        -0.8                                                                             -0.8


    -0.4                                                                        -0.4                                                                             -0.4
                                                                             CP




                                                                                                                                                           CP
Cp




          0                                                                           0                                                                               0


      0.4                                                                         0.4                                                                               0.4

            0       0.2        0.4         0.6       0.8       1                        0       0.2       0.4             0.6      0.8        1                        0       0.2       0.4            0.6      0.8        1
                                     X/C                                                                   X/C, xoc                                                                       X/C, xoc




                                                                                   34
                                                           American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                            Case 2: Wing-Body
                                         All Solutions, Finest Grid
                                              M=0.85, CL=0.50
         Eta=0.131                     Ames W.T. Data                               Eta=0.286                                                  Eta=0.502
-1.2                                                      -1.2                                                             -1.2
                                       a=2.60, CL=0.48
                                       a=2.86, CL=0.52
-0.8                                                      -0.8                                                             -0.8


-0.4                                                      -0.4                                                             -0.4
Cp




                                                          Cp




                                                                                                                           Cp
     0                                                         0                                                                0


0.4                                                       0.4                                                                 0.4

     0       0.2     0.4         0.6     0.8      1            0             0.2    0.4         0.6     0.8       1             0        0.2   0.4         0.6     0.8         1
                           X/C                                                            X/C                                                        X/C

                                                                                     Turbulence Model
                     Eta=0.603                                     Eta=0.846                      SA                                           Eta=0.950
-1.2                                                      -1.2                                    SA QCR                   -1.2
                                                                                                  SST
                                                                                                  k-kL, k-e Lam-B
                                                                                                  EARSM, RSM-w
-0.8                                                      -0.8                                    LBM-VLES                 -0.8


-0.4                                                      -0.4                                                             -0.4
Cp




                                                          Cp




                                                                                                                           Cp
     0                                                         0                                                                0


0.4                                                       0.4                                                                 0.4

     0       0.2     0.4         0.6     0.8      1            0             0.2    0.4         0.6     0.8       1             0        0.2   0.4         0.6     0.8         1
                           X/C                                                            X/C                                                        X/C

                   Case
     Figure 18. Case         WB wing pressure distributions, all solutions – finest grids, M=0.85,
                          2: Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon
                     2: CRM
                                Finest GridCL=0.50.
                                                      M=0.85, CL=0.50
                                                                                           Eta=0.286                                                         Eta=0.502
-1.2 Eta=0.131                         Ames W.T. Data              -1.2                                                              -1.2
                                       a=2.83, CL=0.49

-0.8                                                               -0.8                                                              -0.8


-0.4                                                               -0.4                                                              -0.4
                                                                                                                                    Cp
Cp




                                                                   Cp




     0                                                                  0                                                                 0


 0.4                                                               0.4                                                               0.4

         0    0.2     0.4          0.6      0.8       1                 0          0.2     0.4          0.6     0.8       1                0    0.2          0.4         0.6       0.8   1
                            X/C                                                                   X/C                                                              X/C


                      Eta=0.603                                             Eta=0.846 Turbulence Model                                                       Eta=0.950
-1.2                                                               -1.2                                       SA                     -1.2
                                                                                                              SA QRC
                                                                                                              SST
                                                                                                              k-e, k-kL, k-e LamB
-0.8                                                               -0.8                                       EARSM, RSM-W           -0.8
                                                                                                              LBM-VLES


-0.4                                                               -0.4                                                              -0.4
Cp




                                                                   Cp




                                                                                                                                     Cp




     0                                                                  0                                                                 0


 0.4                                                               0.4                                                               0.4

         0    0.2     0.4          0.6      0.8       1                 0          0.2     0.4          0.6     0.8       1                0    0.2          0.4         0.6       0.8   1
                            X/C                                                                   X/C                                                              X/C

 Figure 19. Case 2: CRM WBNP wing pressure distributions, all solutions – finest grids, M=0.85,
                                       CL=0.50.



                                                                       35
                                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                  PS5X                                                                                     PS6X                                                                                               PS1X
     -1                                                                             -1                                                                                                   -1
                                                                                           E
                                                                                           k
                                                                                           N
                                                                                           k                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                              kk
          NO
          O
                                                                                             Z
                                                                                             kN
                                                                                          k M                                                                                                kq
          qO
           E                                                                                    kN
                                                                                                N                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Z
           OK
            k                                                                            K
                                                                                         k         k                                                                                          M
          M                                                                              k         k                                                                                          k M
                                                                                                                                                                                              K
                                                                                                                                                                                              k
-0.5          ZO
              O
              N
                 NOEK
                BM  k NONEO                                                    -0.5                E Nk                                                                             -0.5      N
                      NBO M
                      ZO   O
                           OO B
                              N EBK
                            ZNO   k O                                                               MZKk EB MZ
                                                                                                             kkN  kEB
                                                                                                               BkkB   kK
                                                                                                                       ZNk                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                        kk
                      O             ZMNN                                                              kq               k  BMNkE NZ
                                                                                                                                 kN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         KNkBZ kBM kE
                                              E
                                              BOM                                        N                                         kK
                                                                                                                                    kM                                                                              kkK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B  kZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k kN
          O
          Z                                     O
                                                ZN                                                                                    kE                                                                                   kEBMZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               kB
                                                  B                                                                                     NB                                                                                      kkK kEk k
                                                      qE                                                                                  Z
                                                                                                                                          kkB                                                                                            BZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          kM
                                                       O                                                                                       kNk                                                                                        BkNk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qNK
     0                                               OZB
                                                       K
                                                       k
                                                       N                            0                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                  NK
                                                                                                                                                   kqkE                                  0                                                        kMkZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      kk NkEMk Z
                                                                                         M
CP




                                                                               CP




                                                                                                                                                                                    Cp
                                                        NM       O                                                                                                                                                                                           B kkK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k kE
                                                         OO                              k
                                                                                         M                                                             kB
                                                                                                                                                        Z
                                                                                                                                                        kNk                                                                                                           MkB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        KK   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
          N                                                EB
                                                            NO
                                                             OZ
                                                              q
                                                              OO
                                                                 O
                                                                 O                                                                                          MK
                                                                                                                                                             kN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k kZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qkM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Z k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                              N
                                                              M B
                                                                E
                                                                KE
                                                                 N
                                                                 q
                                                                 B
                                                                 k                                                                                                Z
                                                                                                                                                               EkkqkN    k
                                                                                                                                                                         k                                                                                                   
              M
              O
              OO
                                                                OZ
                                                                 O
                                                                 Z
                                                                 N
                                                                 M
                                                                 N
                                                                 Z
                                                                 O
                                                                                         Bk                                                                         MNkM
                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                                      EZ
                                                                                                                                                                       NkE
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         Z                         kZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
              N E
                q                                               MB
                                                                 O                           kM                                                                       BE k                          K
                                                                                                                                                                                                    kM
          BO
          O   Z MN
                   B                                            N
                                                                O
                                                                E
                                                                O
                                                                K
                                                                k
                                                                N
                                                                 q                            B
                                                                                              kZ
                                                                                               k
                                                                                               N                                                                     MZ
                                                                                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                      kqk
                                                                                                                                                                       N                         q B  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      k                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                   NN                                                                                                                                                N                                                                                                    k
0.5                 q
                     M                                       M
                                                               B
                                                               OZ
                                                                               0.5       qK N
                                                                                            k N
                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                Nk Ek
                                                                                                                                                                   B                0.5          K
                                                                                                                                                                                                 k E
                                                                                                                                                                                                 k                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k
                                                             O
                                                             O                                      Mk                                                        kMk
                                                                                                                                                                Z                               Mk        kk  k                                                        Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       kk
                      O
                      Z
                      K
                      kB                                  OE                                         k
                                                                                                     B                                                       K                                kk
                                                                                                                                                                                              Z             MZ                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   kkK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k
                        ME                               O
                                                         Z
                                                         M                                M
                                                                                         Bk
                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                      NZ
                                                                                                       kME
                                                                                                       q                                                 MBk                                                 kM
                                                                                                                                                                                                             BqB
                                                                                                                                                                                                               N                                                 EBN
                         OM                          qN
                                                    BK
                                                     k                                                                                                NkqE
                                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                                     kZ                                       B                 K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                kEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  kk Z                                       Nk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
          BM               OO
                           NB
                            Z NE                   EN
                                                  ZO
                                                   N                                       k              B
                                                                                                           M
                                                                                                           NkZ
                                                                                                             k EkBK                          MNB
                                                                                                                                           kk     kN
                                                                                                                                                   K                                            k                    kB M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        B                                k kM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        kB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k kkkEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Z
            B                  MONBO
                                   ZNkE
                                     KON BO
                                        OMNZ EOBNM
                                          O     O                                                                  kNZ
                                                                                                                   kM  kEBNNk k M
                                                                                                                                kB
                                                                                                                                ZkKNk B
                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                   k     kN
                                                                                                                                       NkZ   E                                                                          EKk kZ    kM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kB EkN k NB kkkE B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        kK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Z       MNZ
                                                                                                                                                                     kkkkkk                   ME
     1    M
          OO                                                                        1                                                                                                    1    k
                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                         Z
                                                                                         kE                                                                                                   Nk
          K
          N
          O
          Ek                                                                            N
                                                                                         k
                                                                                         M
                                                                                         Bk                                                                                                   k
              1000                   1100                     1200                             1000                            1100                              1200                               1000                           1100                             1200
                                      X                                                                                         X                                                                                                   X

                                  PS4X                                                        PS3X                                                                                                                            PS2X
     -1                                                                             -1                                                                                                   -1
           OZ
            N                                                                                 O                                                                                                 kq
            O
            K
            k
           HM
           O                                                                                  ZB
                                                                                              OK                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                                  kk
                                                                                              H
                                                                                              OMkk
                                                                                                K                                                                                               kM
                                                                                                                                                                                                Z
           OK q
              k                                                                                  O                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                                                                                                                   B
-0.5          EO
               O M
                  B
                  Oq N
                                                                               -0.5                                                                                                 -0.5        E
                NHZO OEN O
                        HB
                        O K
                          kN
                           Z E
                           O  M O  Z
                                HBNO  HK
                                      E
                                    q O NN O
                                       kB  Z
                                           OMHE
                                              ON
                                               B
                                                                                                E OZMqO
                                                                                                  HB
                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                   O   O             H
                                                                                                                     O    B
                                                                                                                        kNO
                                                                                                                        K
                                                                                                                        Z
                                                                                                                     EB O HM
                                                                                                                           E                                                                        K
                                                                                                                                                                                                    k M
                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                      NZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                                                                                       B
           q                                                                                            ENq
                                                                                                          OO
                                                                                                           HBO
                                                                                                             ZK
                                                                                                             OkONM
                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                EO Z O
                                                                                                                  BO         ZO
                                                                                                                             O                                                                         kk                                kk kNkB EZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MkBEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Z
          N                                       O
                                                  Z
                                                  NO
                                                   HBN                                                                        HB
                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                          K kZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                          kkB
                                                                                                                                                                                                            E kMNN kEZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     kB                            kq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                     EK
                                                      kqO                                                                                                                                                                                                kB k
                                                         qM                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                   ZM                                                                                                                        EZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                          N
                                                          Z
                                                          O
                                                          HB
                                                          O         M                                                               H
                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                    B                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  K
     0                                                       O
                                                             N      E
                                                                    H
                                                                    O               0                                                 OE M   E
                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                             O                                           0                                                                        kk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mkk
Cp




                                                                               Cp




                                                                                                                                                                                    Cp
                                                             E                                                                          OO
                                                               N
                                                               B
                                                               MO                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                          q  O                                                                                                                          kZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NE kM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           kqBk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
          O                                                     HB
                                                                 O
                                                                 Z
                                                                 Oq
                                                                 OO
                                                                  k
                                                                  K
                                                                  ON
                                                                   E
                                                                   B
                                                                   O
                                                                   q
                                                                   H
                                                                   M
                                                                    O
                                                                    B
                                                                    N
                                                                    E
                                                                    Z
                                                                    N
                                                                    Z
                                                                    O
                                                                    H                      O
                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                          ZEB
                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                             B
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                             K
                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                             Z
                                                                                                                                             Z
                                                                                                                                             O                                                                                                                                k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Z
               E                                                    q                         E
                                                                                              M                                                                                                                                                                               k
               q
               OM
              qOO                                                   N
                                                                    O                         M
                                                                                              O                                              B                                                 B M
                                                                                                                                                                                                 k                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Z
              N  B
                 M
                 HZ
                 OO                                                 B
                                                                    q
                                                                    K
                                                                    k
                                                                    O
                                                                    Z
                                                                    N                           M
                                                                                                B
                                                                                                H
                                                                                                OO
                                                                                                 OO
                                                                                                  Z                                         OZ                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k
           O     K
                   k                                               O
                                                                   H
                                                                   Eq                             q                                         O
                                                                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                             q                                                  M B                                                                          qk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k
          O         M
                    N                                             BN                       B                                               M
                                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                                                           Kk                                                           kZ                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B
0.5         N
            M
            O       BN                                         O
                                                                HM
                                                                 N
                                                                 q
                                                                 O
                                                                 Z
                                                                 q             0.5                 MO
                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                    kB
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                           Z                                        0.5                   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                          M
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qK                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k
                       N
                       M
                       E                                     M
                                                             NE
                                                              O
                                                                                           q
                                                                                                       E                               M
                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                       OEO                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                N           kM
                                                                                                                                                                                                             kB                                                      BkN
          M             O
                        H                                   kO                                         N
                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                       H
                                                                                                       M
                          OZNB                            ZK
                                                          O
                                                          H
                                                        BNq                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                   qO
                                                                                                                                    Z                                                           k
                                                                                                                                                                                                Z             N                                                 kEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             kkZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k
           M                 K
                             M
                             q
                             O kO
                                H
                                E                     E                                    BM
                                                                                            O
                                                                                            Z
                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                         ZB
                                                                                                          OMO
                                                                                                            HE O             OK EBNO
                                                                                                                               kM                                                              M                   NZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    kEBk k                                kBkK
          BO
           Z
                                N
                                OO ZBOO
                                   N  HEMNB
                                          O   kE
                                           Z qO
                                              H
                                              N
                                              K   M
                                                  O
                                                NBZO
                                                   HO                                                          BN
                                                                                                               ZM
                                                                                                                KkO
                                                                                                                  HE B
                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                     NZO
                                                                                                                       H
                                                                                                                       O    ZO
                                                                                                                       MEBNOH                                                                 BB                          MZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            kB  kk BZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EkMK        kN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     kqE N BkM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M kE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Z
           O
           B
           H
           k
           K
           O                                                      AA                        O
                                                                                            B
                                                                                            H
     1     N
                                                                    A
                                                                    AA
                                                                     A              1      O
                                                                                           E                                                                                            1      k
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                               kk
          E
          M                                                                                K
                                                                                           Nk                                                                                                  M
          q                                                                                O
                                                                                           M                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                                                                                                               K
              1000                   1100                     1200                             1000                            1100                              1200                               1000                           1100                             1200
                                      X                                                                                         X                                                                                                   X

Figure 20. Case 2: CRM WBNP nacelle pressure distributions, all solutions – finest grids, M=0.85,
                                        CL=0.50.




                        0.8                                                                                                                                                                                                       Wing-Body
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Black Symbol - Test Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Solid Lines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wing-Body-Nacelle-Pylon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Red Symbol - Test Data
                        0.6                                                                                                                                                                                                       Dashed Lines
              cls




                        0.4




                        0.2
                                                                                         nacelle
              cms.25c




                            0
                                 0                                       0.2                                       0.4                                                        0.6                                   0.8                                                            1



                        -0.2
                                                                                                               Span fraction - eta

Figure 21. Case 2: CRM WBNP and WB wing section lift and pitching moment, M=0.85, CL=0.50.



                                                                                       36
                                                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                                                                      Case 3: Lift and Pitching Moment
                                                                                                      Wing-Body w/Static Aeroelastics
                                                                                                                All Solutions
                                                                                                             Turbulence Model
                                                       Turbulence Model                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a         A2
                                                               SA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B         B1
                                                               SA QRC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b         B2
                                                               SST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       B3
                                         0.7                                                                                                                                                0.7                                                                                                                 D         D1
                                                               k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d         D2
                                                               EARSM, RSM-w                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E         E1
                                                               LBM-VLES                                                                      m                                                                                                                                                                  F         F1
                                                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                             G                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G                               G         G1
                                                                                                                                             E                                                                                                                         KE
                                    0.65                                                              m
                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                      V
                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             K
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                             J                                        0.65                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ak JEV         O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                                             F                                                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      K                                      
                                                                                                                                             h                                                                                                                    h a K
                                                                                           
                                                                                           
                                                                                               m
                                                                                               K
                                                                                               E
                                                                                               V
                                                                                               T
                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                      J
                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                      
                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H   k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NGJ EK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IF  NVTd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I2
                                                                                                     dI                                     d                                                                                                                                   kI d
                                                                                             k                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a OI N                           J
                                                                                      M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   J1
                                                                                               J                                                                                                                                                                                           J Kd
                                                                                      d
                                                                                              aI
                                                                                               G
                                                                                               
                                                                                               N
                                                                                               h      H                                                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        hGFV
                 CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                    CL - Lift Coefficient
                                                                                      K
                                                                                      O
                                                                                      m
                                                                                      N
                                                                                      J                                                                                                                                                                                                    ONJ                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                             D                                                                                                                                              D                             J2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                         0.6                                          E
                                                                                      I
                                                                                      V
                                                                                      T
                                                                                      k        d
                                                                                               F                                                                                            0.6                                                                                         T kId
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E                     K         K1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                      G        
                                                                                               H      Q
                                                                                                      P                                      M
                                                                                                                                             Q
                                                                                                                                             P                                                                                                                       H h       Pa   PG
                                                                                      
                                                                                      h
                                                                                      
                                                                                      a               D                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D                   k         K2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                               Q
                                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                                                  PF d
                                                                                  M
                                                                                  d
                                                                                  K
                                                                                  N
                                                                                  J
                                                                                  kI
                                                                                  
                                                                                  m
                                                                                  E
                                                                                  V
                                                                                  T
                                                                                  Q
                                                                                  P
                                                                                  
                                                                                      
                                                                                      F
                                                                                      H      
                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H EV             TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          K3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h aP
                                                                                  G   Q
                                                                                      P                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   K4
                                                                                  
                                                                                  a
                                                                                  h
                                                                                  F   D                                                                                                                                                                                              FD                         L         L1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                    0.55                               K
                                                                       d
                                                                       M
                                                                       JI         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  H
                                                                                      B M                                                                                             0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         H                dKI                           L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                       O                                                                                                                                                                                                                  kJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                       N k
                                                                         m
                                                                         Q
                                                                         P                                                                                                                                                                                                                N                     M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BP
                                                                                  D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M1
                                                                         
                                                                         V
                                                                         T
                                                                         E                                                                                                                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                         G                   B                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                         
                                                                         a
                                                                         F
                                                                         h
                                                                         
                                                                                  B      B                                                                                                                                                                        B h aF                                    m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N1
                                                             K dI
                                                               
                                                               J
                                                                         D
                                                                         H
                                                                        bbb
                                                                                        B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HB B DKI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tk                        O         O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                             O
                                                             M
                                                             N                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O N
                                                             Q
                                                             D
                                                             m
                                                             
                                                              P
                                                              V
                                                              E
                                                               k
                                                               T
                                                                                     
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EPD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     V                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O2
                                         0.5                 G aqq
                                                               
                                                               F   ZL
                                                                      
                                                                     L
                                                                       
                                                                      U
                                                                       u
                                                                       U
                                                                       u
                                                                       U
                                                                        bB
                                                                        u
                                                                        b                                                                                                                   0.5                                                                     B 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    bbb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Z 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             uQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              aQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qF      G
                                                             Hh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H                                         Q         Q1
                                                             
                                                             B                                                                                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                U         U1
                                    0.45                                                                                                                                             0.45                                                                                                                     u         U2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V         V1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       V2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         V3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Z1
                                         0.4                                                                                                                                                0.4
                                               2             2.5                  3           3.5                                            4        4.5                                         0                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                          -0.02 -0.04 -0.06 -0.08 -0.1 -0.12 -0.14                                                                       -0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Z2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Z3
                                                                                      Case 3: Lift and Pitching Moment
                                                                         Angle-of-Attack                          CM - Pitching Moment                                                                                                                                                                                    Test NTF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Test Ames
                                                                              Wing-Body
                                                               Figure 22. CRM WB           w/Staticmoment
                                                                                 Lift and pitching  Aeroelastics
                                                                                                          for all solutions, M=0.85.
                                                                                                       Grid Type & Turbulence Model
                            Boeing Unstructured Grids                                                                                        Geolab Unstructured Grids                                                                                        Custom Unstructured Grids
                            0.7                                                                                               B0.7 B1                                                                                                                         0.7
                                                                                                                              b B2                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                B3                                                                   B
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                      E                                                                                m
                        0.65                                                          K                                       D D1
                                                                                                                              0.65                                                           Z
                                                                                                                                                                                             B        b                                            0.65                              m L
                                                                    K                 J
                                                                                      k                                       E E1                   Z
                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                             b        h                                                                             m  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        F
                                                                  K J
                                                                  k k                                                        H H1                   E                                       h        H                                                                             F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L N
CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                                     CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                     B                                                                     CL - Lift Coefficient                                      d d
                                                                K
                                                                J J                                                          h H2                   h
                                                                                                                                                   Z H
                                                                                                                                                     b                                       H        D                                                                           M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N N
                            0.6                                 k  P
                                                                                     P                                       V0.6 V1              E
                                                                                                                                                   h
                                                                                                                                                   B                                         D                                                                0.6                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L F   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d  M
                                                              K
                                                              J
                                                              k
                                                              P
                                                                  P                                                           Z Z2
                                                                                                                              Z Z3               E
                                                                                                                                                 Z b D
                                                                                                                                                   H
                                                                                                                                                   V                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L F 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                m
                                                               P                                                                                h D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F       d
                        0.55                             K
                                                         J                                                                    S S1
                                                                                                                              0.55               B
                                                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                                 V                                                                                                 0.55                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N     M                                       D2
                                                         k
                                                         P
                                                         
                                                                                                                              Z Z1             E
                                                                                                                                               Z b
                                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                               h    V                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F         F                                   F1

                                                   K                              J       J1                                       Test NTF
                                                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                               H        S
                                                                                                                                                      S                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L                                   L1
                            0.5
                                                   J
                                                   k
                                                   P
                                                                                        J2
                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                   Test Ames
                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                            E  b
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                             ZZS       V
                                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F                                              L2
                                                                                  K       K1                                                V
                                                                                                                                            B
                                                                                                                                            Hh       S                                                                                                                                  M                                   M1
                                                                                  k       K2                                                S
                                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        m                                   M2

                        0.45                                                      P       P1                                  0.45                                                                                                                 0.45                                 N                                   N1
                                                                                                                                                 S                                                                                                                                                                         V3
                                                                                          Test NTF
                                                                                          Test Ames
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Test NTF
                            0.4                                                                                                              0.4                                                                                                              0.4                                                           Test
                               2                   2.5         3            3.5       4        4.5                                              2   2.5       3            3.5                        4      4.5                                                 2         2.5           3            3.5            4       4.5Ames
                                                         Angle-of-Attack                                                                                    Angle-of-Attack                                                                                                         Angle-of-Attack

                                                   Overset Grids                                                                                    Multiblock Grids                                                                                            Custom Cartesian Grids
                            0.7                                                                                                    0.7                                                                                                              0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SA
                                                                           q                                                                                     T                                                                                         SA QRC                                           G
                        0.65                                             O
                                                                         q 
                                                                           J
                                                                           u                                        0.65                                                                                                                           0.65                                                     
                                                                          a                                                                                  T                                                                                            SST
                                                                         J
                                                                       q u                                                                                                                                                                                                                               G 
                                                                         a                                                                                  T Q Q                                                                                          k-e, k-kL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I I
                                                                                                           CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                     O J
                                                                       u
                                                                       a   O                                                                              Q                                                                                                EARSM, RSM-w                               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                            0.6                                      
                                                                     q                                                             0.6                    T Q                                                                                       0.6                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                     J
                                                                     u
                                                                     a                                                                                                                                                                                     LBM-VLES     G
                                                               q
                                                               J
                                                               u                                                                                        T 
                                                                                                                                                        Q                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        G                            
                                                               a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                        0.55                             O
                                                         
                                                         q                        a   A2                            0.55
                                                                                                                                                      T 
                                                                                                                                                      Q                                                                                            0.55                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G                   
                                                         u
                                                         J
                                                         a                        O   O1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G          G1
                                                   
                                                   O
                                                   q                                 O2                                                            Q
                                                                                                                                                    T                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              I          I1
                            0.5                    u
                                                   J
                                                   a                                                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5           G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                  u   U1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I2
                                                                                  J   U2                                                                        Q                                          Q1                                                                                                             K3
                        0.45                                                      q   Q2                            0.45                                        T                                          T1                                      0.45                                                                  K4
                                                                                      Test NTF                                                                                                            V2                                                                                                             Test NTF
                                                                                      Test Ames                                                                                                            Test NTF                                                                                                        Test Ames
                            0.4                                                                                                    0.4                                                                     Test Ames                                          0.4
                               2                   2.5         3            3.5       4        4.5                                    2             2.5       3         3.5                           4       4.5                                                2         2.5           3            3.5            4       4.5
                                                         Angle-of-Attack                                                                                  Angle-of-Attack                                                                                                           Angle-of-Attack

                                                              Figure 23. CRM WB total lift by grid type and turbulence model, M=0.85.




                                                                                                                    37
                                                                                            American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                  Case 3: Wing-Body Wing Pressue Distributions
                         Figure 24. CRM  Separation bubble extant vs. angle-of-attack.
                                    All Solutions
                                 M=0.85, AOA=3.0
                       Turbulence Model
-1.2
         Eta=0.131                SA                   -1.2
                                                                Eta=0.286                  Ame W.T. Data
                                                                                                             -1.2           Eta=0.502
                                  SA QCR                                                   a=2.86, CL=0.52
                                  SST                                                      a=3.10, CL=0.55
                                  k-e, k-kl, k-eLamB
                                  EARSM, RSM-w
-0.8                              LBM-VLES             -0.8                                                  -0.8


-0.4                                                   -0.4                                                  -0.4
Cp




                                                       Cp




                                                                                                             Cp




     0                                                      0                                                     0


0.4                                                    0.4                                                   0.4

     0      0.2      0.4         0.6   0.8     1            0      0.2   0.4         0.6      0.8     1           0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1
                           X/C                                                 X/C                                                X/C


-1.2                Eta=0.727                          -1.2              Eta=0.846                           -1.2           Eta=0.950


-0.8                                                   -0.8                                                  -0.8


-0.4                                                   -0.4                                                  -0.4
Cp




                                                       Cp




                                                                                                             Cp




     0                                                      0                                                     0


0.4                                                    0.4                                                   0.4

     0      0.2      0.4         0.6   0.8     1            0      0.2   0.4         0.6      0.8     1           0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1
                           X/C                                                 X/C                                                X/C

                     Figure 25. CRM Wing-Body Pressure Distributions – 3.0° angle-of-attack.


                                                                     38
                                             American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                    Case 3: Wing-Body Wing Pressue Distributions
                                   All Solutions
                                  M=0.85, AOA=3.5
          Eta=0.131 Turbulence Model
                               SA                                       Eta=0.286                  Ames W.T. Data                    Eta=0.502
                                        SA QCR                                                     a=3.38, CL=0.58
                                        SST                                                        a=3.62, CL=0.61
     -1                                 k-e, k-kl, k-e LamB        -1                                                     -1
                                        EARSM, RSM-w
                                        LBM-VLES

-0.5                                                          -0.5                                                   -0.5
Cp




                                                              Cp




                                                                                                                     Cp
     0                                                             0                                                      0



0.5                                                           0.5                                                    0.5
   0          0.2     0.4         0.6     0.8       1            0         0.2   0.4         0.6      0.8       1       0      0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1
                            X/C                                                        X/C                                                 X/C


                      Eta=0.727                                                  Eta=0.846                                           Eta=0.950
     -1                                                            -1                                                     -1



-0.5                                                          -0.5                                                   -0.5
Cp




                                                              Cp




                                                                                                                     Cp
     0                                                             0                                                      0



0.5                                                           0.5                                                    0.5
   0          0.2     0.4
                    Case    3:0.6Wing-Body
                          X/C
                                   0.8  1       0
                                             Wing   0.2  0.4
                                                   Pressue      0.6  0.8  1
                                                             X/CDistributions
                                                                                  0   0.2   0.4
                                                                                                X/C
                                                                                                    0.6                                                0.8   1

                                          All Solutions
                      Figure 26. CRM Wing-Body       Pressure Distributions – 3.5° angle-of-attack.
                                       M=0.85, AOA=4.00
                        Turbulence Model
          Eta=0.131                SA                                   Eta=0.286                  Ames W.T. Data                    Eta=0.502
-1.2                               SA QCR                     -1.2                                 a=3.88, CL=0.62   -1.2
                                   SST                                                             a=4.12, CL=0.64
                                   k-c, k-kl, k-e LamB
                                   EARSM, RSM-w
-0.8                               LBM-VLES                   -0.8                                                   -0.8


-0.4                                                          -0.4                                                   -0.4
Cp




                                                              Cp




                                                                                                                     Cp




     0                                                             0                                                      0


0.4                                                           0.4                                                    0.4

      0       0.2     0.4         0.6     0.8       1               0      0.2   0.4         0.6      0.8       1          0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1
                            X/C                                                        X/C                                                 X/C


-1.2                  Eta=0.727                               -1.2               Eta=0.846                           -1.2            Eta=0.950


-0.8                                                          -0.8                                                   -0.8


-0.4                                                          -0.4                                                   -0.4
Cp




                                                              Cp




                                                                                                                     Cp




     0                                                             0                                                      0


0.4                                                           0.4                                                    0.4

      0       0.2     0.4         0.6     0.8       1               0      0.2   0.4         0.6      0.8       1          0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1
                            X/C                                                        X/C                                                 X/C



                       Figure 27. CRM Wing-Body Pressure Distributions – 4.0° angle-of-attack.




                                                                        39
                                                American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                                                                                                         Case 3: Wing-Body
                                                                                                                                        Section Lift Coefficient
                                                                                                                                               M = 0.85
                                                           Eta=0.131                                                                                     Eta=0.286                                                                               Eta=0.502
                                            0.8                                                                                         0.8                                                                                      0.8
                                                   Turbulence Model
                                                               SA                                                                                                                                                                                     
      CLs - Section Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                  CLs - Section Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                          CLs - Section Lift Coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                               SA QCR                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                            0.7                SST                                                                      0.7                                                                                      0.7               O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H                 Test
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F
                                                               k-e, k-kl, k-e LamB                                                                               Z
                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                 G
                                                                                                                                                                 h                                                                               G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P h h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E     E1
                                                               EARSM, RSM-w                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                               Z
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                               E                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N   H               F     F1
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                                                               H F                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              F P                 G     G1
                                                               LBM-VLES                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                             Z
                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                             h   N
                                            0.6                                                                                         0.6                  H N
                                                                                                                                                             G
                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                           h   F                                                                 0.6        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H                   H     H1
                                                                                                                                                           G
                                                                                                                                                           H F P                                                                          N H                     h     H2
                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                           F P                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Z
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                         Z
                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                         P
                                                                                                                                                         h
                                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                                 P                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F                       N     N1
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     Z
                                                                     E                                                                                   F
                                                                                                                                                         H                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H                       P     P1
                                                                    G
                                                                   
                                                                   
                                                                   Z
                                                                   E
                                                                   O h
                                                                     H                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     Z
                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                                     F                                                                                                            O     O1
                                                                   h                                                                                 H
                                            0.5                  G
                                                                
                                                                Z
                                                                E
                                                                h
                                                                G
                                                                   H F                                                                  0.5    
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               O
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                               Z
                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                               F                                                                                 0.5                                   O2
                                                             O
                                                             Z
                                                             E
                                                             N  H
                                                              N N N
                                                             
                                                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                               H
                                                             h
                                                             G                                                                                                                                                                                                    Z     Z1
                                                           Z
                                                           E
                                                           N
                                                           P
                                                           h
                                                           G
                                                           F
                                                           H F F F
                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Z2
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         
                                                         O
                                                         Z
                                                         E
                                                         N
                                                         P
                                                         h
                                                         G
                                                         F
                                                         H   P  P P                                                                                                                                                                                                    Z3
                                            0.4       
                                                      
                                                      
                                                      O
                                                      Z
                                                      N
                                                      E
                                                      P
                                                      h              P                                                                  0.4                                                                                      0.4
                                               2     2.5   3   3.5   4        4.5   5                                                      2   2.5       3    3.5     4    4.5   5                                                  2    2.5    3    3.5     4    4.5   5
                                                            Angle-of-Attack                                                                              Angle-of-Attack                                                                        Angle-of-Attack

                                                             Eta=0.727                                                                                    Eta=0.846                                                                             Eta=0.950
                                            0.8                                                                                         0.8                                                                                      0.6
      CLs - Section Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                  CLs - Section Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                          CLs -Section Lift Coefficient
                                            0.7                                                                                         0.7                                                                                      0.5                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Z
                                                                 P                                                                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Z P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                              N
                                                             Z
                                                             N
                                                               G
                                                               F
                                                               
                                                               Z
                                                               P F
                                                                 N                                                                                         N                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Z 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F
                                                            P
                                                           N
                                                           O
                                                           Z
                                                           
                                                           G F O
                                                             E   
                                                               E 
                                                                 Z                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                         Z 
                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                                                                           F
                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  F   h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H
                                                         N 
                                                           E
                                                           P
                                                           F   G
                                                                E                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                        G
                                                                                                                                                       Z P
                                                                                                                                                         F E
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P   h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  h H
                                                          h G
                                                         G
                                                         Z
                                                         
                                                         P
                                                         E   h h                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                     O E
                                                                                                                                                       P 
                                                                                                                                                         E                                                                                    G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Z F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H H
                                                       N F       
                                                                 h                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                                     Z
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                       F
                                                                                                                                                       G                                                                                      E h
                                            0.6        O
                                                       G
                                                        h
                                                        H
                                                       P   H H                                                                          0.6        G
                                                                                                                                                   N E
                                                                                                                                                     P   h h                                                                     0.4        G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h
                                                       Z
                                                       
                                                       E
                                                       F       H                                                                                   Z F
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   E h
                                                                                                                                                       h H
                                                                                                                                                       H   H                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F H
                                                     N
                                                     O
                                                     G
                                                     
                                                     P
                                                     Z h
                                                      H
                                                                 H                                                                               G
                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                 O F H                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E h
                                                     
                                                     E
                                                     F                                                                                            H
                                                                                                                                                 P
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 Z
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                 E h                                                                                      F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                                               O F                                                                                        h
                                            0.5
                                                     h
                                                     H
                                                                                                                                        0.5    
                                                                                                                                               P
                                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                               Z
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                               E h                                                                               0.3
                                                                                                                                               F
                                                                                                                                               H
                                                                                                                                               h

                                            0.4                                                                                         0.4                                                                                      0.2
                                               2     2.5    3    3.5     4    4.5   5                                                      2   2.5       3    3.5     4    4.5   5                                                  2    2.5    3    3.5     4    4.5   5
                                                            Angle-of-Attack                                                 Angle-of-Attack              Angle-of-Attack
                                                                                     Case 3: Wing-Body
                                                                  Figure 28. CRM Wing-Body
                                                                             Section        Section
                                                                                     Pitching MomentLift (Normal Force), M=0.85.
                                                                                                          Coefficient
                                                                                           M = 0.85
Cms - Section Pitching Moment Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                     Cms - Section Pitching Moment Coefficient
                                                                                            Cms - SectionPitching Moment Coefficient




                                                             Eta=0.131                                                                                   Eta=0.286                                                                              Eta=0.502
                                              0                                                                                           0                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SA
                                     -0.02                                                                  -0.02                                                                                    -0.02                                           SA QCR
                                                      H
                                                      
                                                       G
                                                      G
                                                      h
                                                      E
                                                      P
                                                      N
                                                      Z H
                                                           P P P
                                                                  P                                                                                                                                                                                  SST
                                                         G
                                                        h
                                                        P
                                                        E
                                                        N
                                                        Z H
                                                           H
                                                           G
                                                          h
                                                          P
                                                          N
                                                          E
                                                          Z 
                                                            h H   N                                                                             H H
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k-e, k-kl, k-e LamB
                                     -0.04                   G
                                                            N
                                                            E
                                                            Z N
                                                              h
                                                              
                                                              
                                                                N
                                                                H                                           -0.04                                G
                                                                                                                                                h
                                                                                                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                                N    P P P P
                                                                                                                                                    H H                                              -0.04
                                                              E G
                                                                h
                                                                
                                                              Z E H
                                                                  h
                                                                 G                  Test                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                Z  G
                                                                                                                                                  h
                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                  Z 
                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                                                    h
                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                                                                    E   N H N
                                                                                                                                                        H N                                                                                          EARSM, RSM-w
                                                                Z 
                                                                  E
                                                                  
                                                                  Z            E     E1
                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                    Z 
                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                      h
                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                      N 
                                                                                                                                                        h   H                                                                                        LBM-VLES
                                                                                                                                                      Z  G
                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                        Z h
                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                          E h
                                                                                                                                                           G
                                                                                                                                                            
                                     -0.06                                     G     G1                     -0.06                                         Z 
                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                                                                            Z                                        -0.06
                                                                               H     H1
                                     -0.08                                     h     H2
                                                                                                            -0.08                                                                                    -0.08                                 H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h H H H
                                                                               N     N1                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P P H h h
                                                                               P                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Z 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h h H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P P H
                                                                                     P1                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G G G  G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Z 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N P
                                            -0.1                               Z     Z1                                                 -0.1                                                                                     -0.1              E 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Z E 
                                                                                    Z2                                                                                                                                                              Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Z
                                                                                    Z3
                                     -0.12                                                                  -0.12                                                                                    -0.12
                                          2           2.5    3    3.5    4    4.5    5                           2                             2.5        3    3.5    4    4.5   5                        2                               2.5    3    3.5    4    4.5    5
                                                            Angle-of-Attack                                                                              Angle-of-Attack                                                                        Angle-of-Attack
Cms - Section Pitching Moment Coefficient




                                                                                            Cms - Section Pitching Moment Coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                     Cms -Section Pitching Moment Coefficient




                                                             Eta=0.727                                                                                    Eta=0.846                                                                             Eta=0.950
                                              0                                                                                           0                                                                                        0

                                     -0.02                                                                  -0.02                                                                                    -0.02

                                     -0.04                                                                  -0.04                                                                                    -0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   h H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 h H  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Z Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     P N
                                     -0.06                            H                                     -0.06                                                                                    -0.06                                   h H 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Z N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h H 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 P G G
                                                                    H E
                                                                      h                                                                                                                                                                    H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Z Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P
                                     -0.08                       H  h 
                                                                      
                                                                      Z                                     -0.08                                              h
                                                                                                                                                             h H                                     -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G
                                                                 h GE                                                                                     h H
                                                            h
                                                          h H H
                                                              h  G  
                                                                    
                                                                    Z
                                                                      N
                                                                      G                                                                                h H
                                                                                                                                                     h H     
                                                                                                                                                             E 
                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                               G
                                                                                                                                                               Z
                                                       h H       
                                                                 E
                                                                   N
                                                                    P                                                                              h H   
                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                          E  
                                                                                                                                                             Z P
                                                       H    
                                                              E
                                                              
                                                             N  Z    P                                                                         h    
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                       E  Z GP N
                                                                                                                                                             N
                                            -0.1       
                                                        N
                                                       E
                                                       Z
                                                          E
                                                          Z
                                                          P
                                                            E
                                                           N
                                                            Z
                                                            P P
                                                              Z NP                                                                      -0.1    H H
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                                                   Z
                                                                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                     Z
                                                                                                                                                     P
                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                       Z N
                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                                                                       P  P
                                                                                                                                                          G                                                                      -0.1
                                                       P
                                                       N    G
                                                              G                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                E  P
                                                                                                                                                Z N G
                                                                                                                                                P      G
                                                       G G                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                G G
                                     -0.12                                                                  -0.12                                                                                    -0.12
                                          2           2.5   3   3.5   4       4.5    5                           2                             2.5   3   3.5   4           4.5   5                        2                               2.5    3    3.5    4    4.5    5
                                                            Angle-of-Attack                                                                              Angle-of-Attack                                                                        Angle-of-Attack
                                                            Figure 29. CRM Wing-Body Section 0.25 Chord Pitching Moment, M=0.85.




                                                                                                       40
                                                                               American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                                               Case 3: Lift and Pitching Moment
                                                                               Wing-Body w/Static Aeroelastics
                                                                                 Solutions minus All Outliers
                                                                                   Turbulence Model Type

                                                                                                                                                                                                 Delta CM
                        0.7                                                                                                           0.7                                                         =0.045
                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                              
                                                                               Z
                                                                               m
                                                                               
                                                                               T
                                                                               q
                                                                               G                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q 
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                    T            
                                                   Delta CL=0.063
                                                                           
                                                                               E
                                                                               L
                                                                                                                                                                                                L G Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                  0.65                                                 m Z
                                                                          
                                                                          q
                                                                          T
                                                                          E
                                                                          L
                                                                               
                                                                               u
                                                                               U
                                                                               a                                               0.65                                 A2                     u E
                                                                                                                                                                                            U       L Z 
                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                          
                                                                              
                                                                               h                                                                                                          h u G       q 
                                                                     mZ
                                                                         G
                                                                          u
                                                                          U                                                                                   E      E1
                                                                  E  q
                                                                      L
                                                                      T
                                                                      I H
                                                                          ha HI
                                                                           I                                                                                  G      G1                 H hU        IILET
                                                                    U
                                                                     Gu
                                                                      
                                                                      a                                                                                       I                                   U
                                                                                                                                                                                          H h G IE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   u
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qI 
                                                                 Z    h                                                                                              I1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Z
CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                              CL - Lift Coefficient
                        0.6                                      m
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 
                                                                 q
                                                                 E
                                                                 L
                                                                 T                                                                    0.6                     H      H1                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                           L
                                                              U G
                                                                 
                                                                 u
                                                                 h
                                                                 aI  H                                                                                        h      H2                     H hU     u G
                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                            mI H
                                                             Z
                                                             q
                                                             
                                                             E
                                                             L
                                                             T                                                                                                      K3                         H L      EqZ
                                                          U
                                                            G
                                                             u
                                                             a
                                                             h                                                                                                      K4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  hU uTGI
                  0.55                                      H                                                                  0.55                           L      L1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 H Zq
                                                         
                                                         Z
                                                         
                                                         m
                                                         T
                                                         
                                                         IE
                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                   L2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       TG I
                                                         L
                                                         G
                                                         U
                                                         u
                                                         a
                                                         h                                                                                                    m      M2                          huULE
                                                    I H                                                                                                            O2                         H q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ZT
                                                    q                                                                                                                                                          I
                        0.5                         
                                                    
                                                    Z
                                                    T
                                                    m
                                                    
                                                    E
                                                    L
                                                    G
                                                    U
                                                    u
                                                    a                                                                                 0.5                     q      Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                                                  u 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   LE    G
                                                    h                                                                                                         T      T1
                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                    H               Turbulence Model                                                                          U      U1                        H
                                                                                SA                                                                            u      U2
                                                                                SA QCR                                                                        Z      Z1
                  0.45                                                          SST                                            0.45                                 Z2
                                                                                k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B                                                                Z3
                                                                                EARSM, RSM-w                                                                         Test NTF
                                                                                LBM-VLES                                                                             Test Ames
                        0.4                                                                                                           0.4
                           2                           2.5       3Case
                                                                   3.5   3:4 Drag4.5minus Idealized
                                                                                               0 -0.02Induced     Drag
                                                                                                        -0.04 -0.06  -0.08 -0.1 -0.12
                                                         Angle-of-Attack Wing-Body w/Static Aeroelastics
                                                                                                      CM - Pitching Moment
                                                  Figure 30. CRM Wing-Body Solutions    minusMoment
                                                                              Lift and Pitching All Outliers
                                                                                                       minus Outliers, M=0.85.
                                                                              Turbulence Model Type
                                                                Turbulence Model
                                                                      SA
                                                                      SA QCR
                                                 0.7                  SST
                                                                      k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B                                                                                                                        a   A2
                                                                      EARSM, RSM-w                                                                                                                                 B   B1
                                                                      LBM-VLES                                            B                                      Tq
                                                                                                                                                                     Z                                             b   B2
                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                    L            G
                                                0.65                                                              B   
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                      TEL
                                                                                                                         Z b                                        u
                                                                                                                                                                   AU                                             E   E1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   G   G1
                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                              T
                                                                                                                Z b   Au 
                                                                                                                       U                                          hG                                              H   H1
                                                                                                         B E   L    h
                                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                                                    IH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   h   H2
                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                              u
                                                                                                              A     I HG
                                                                                                              h  
                        CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                                                       Z
                                                                                                     qL
                                                                                                    E     b                                                                                                       I   I1
                                                 0.6                                           Bh  u
                                                                                                    U
                                                                                                        T     HI G                                                                                                    K3
                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K4
                                                                                            
                                                                                            L
                                                                                            q
                                                                                           E Z
                                                                                              T b  H      I G          0.56                                                                B                      L   L1
                                                                                          hU
                                                                                           u
                                                                                           A                                                                                                                       
                                                                                        B                                                                                                   H                         L2
                                                0.55                                      H                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                                                                        q b                       m   M2
                                                                                     T
                                                                                    qL
                                                                                        Zb        I                    0.54                                                          E zL
                                                                                   E                  G                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                   hua
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O2
                                                                                                                                      CL - Lift Coefficient




                                                                                  U
                                                                                  huA                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                 B
                                                                                  H                                    0.52                                                     B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Q2
                                                                               qL
                                                                                 b             I                                                                                   H                               T   T1
                                                                             E 
                                                                                 Z
                                                                                 T                                                                                                                   l
                                                 0.5                         uA
                                                                             U                       G                                                                       q T
                                                                                                                                                                                 b                                 U   U1
                                                                             h                                                                                             E zL                                  u   U2
                                                                             B
                                                                             H                                          0.5                                               ua                                     Z   Z1
                                                                             b                                                                                           h
                                                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                                                          H                                           Z2
                                                                                                                                               0.48                                                                   Z3
                                                0.45                                                                                                                     b                                             Test NTF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Test Ames
                                                                                                                                               0.46
                                                                                                                                                 0.015        0.016        0.017     0.018   0.019   0.02
                                                                                                                                                                   CDp = CD - CL^2/(pi*AR)
                                                 0.4
                                                   0.01              0.015              0.02                0.025                                                 0.03                 0.035                0.04
                                                                                            CDp = CD - CL^2/(pi*AR)
                                                             Figure 31. CRM Wing-Body Idealized Drag minus Outliers, M=0.85.




                                                                                               41
                                                                       American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                          Case 4: CD_TOT - Wing-Body Grid Adaption
                                       All Solutions by Grid Type and Turbulence Model

                                                                             Fixed Grid Solutions - Thin Dashed Lines
                    Grid Adapted Solutions                                   Grid Adapted Solutions - Thick Solid Lines
   0.032                                                                    0.027
                             CL=0.539                                                              Note change of scale
                                                 A   A1 - CL=0.500
                                                     I2 - CL=0.450                         k
                                                                                                                  P
                            CL=0.526
                                                     I3 - CL varies                    k 
                                                                                                             P
                   
                                                                                          K

         0.03                                     P   P1- CL=0.500                   1 Count
                                                                                        Kk
                           CL=0.519               P P2- CL=0.500       0.0265          k 
                                                                                            k
                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                 All Solutions
                                                                                          k K
                                                                                         K                         CL=0.50
                                                                                        KK Jd
                                                                                                     P    L
CD_TOT




                                                                         CD_TOT
                                                                                                         A
                5 Counts
                                                                                             JJd P   L                       
   0.028                                                                    0.026     ZZDJZZ ZL Z
                                                                                      Jdb 
                                                                                              
                                                                                                 b
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                H
                                                                                                   T  A
                                                                                     
                                                                                      DJHH 
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                   
                                                 P                                  P      b  Q 
                                                                                          dBB B A
                                                                                   P DBHBb 
                                                                                       b               q
                                                                                  P A
                                                                                    DB       QAP             M
                                                                                                 
                                                                                     b T APP A
                             P P                                                 P
                                                                                                          U

                                                                                           
                                                                                     TH Q           Turbulence Model
                                                                                                     q M Mu
                                                                                     PA            U
                         P                                                      P   H
                                                                                        
                                                                                         
                                                                                         PP U q u           SA

                                        
                                                                                      EE
                                                                                        A
                                                                                        Q
   0.026               P                                                 0.0255 A     
                                                                                       
                                                                                          E
                                                                                      QUEu
                                                                                        P   U  u
                                                                                               A             SA QRC

                 PPPPA     
                                                                                            q
                     P                                                                   qAE E
                                                                                          u                  SST
                 A                                                                      AAO               O  k-e, k-kl, k-e Lam-B
                A                                                              A      N
                                                                                          O O O              EARSM, RSM-w
                                               2M Cells                                                                           LBM-VLES
                  20M 10M 5M                                     1M                              N
                                                                                        NNN N
                                                                                                     10M 5M           2M Cells           1M
   0.024                                                                    0.025
        0             2E-05       4E-05        6E-05      8E-05 0.0001           0          2E-05         4E-05       6E-05      8E-05 0.0001
                                  GRIDFAC                                      GRIDFAC
                            Figure 32. Case 4: CRM Wing-Body Adapted Grid Total Drag, M=0.85.




                                            Figure 33. Wing static Pressure Distributions, Case 5.




                                                                      42
                                              American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
                                                                   a. Deflection                              b. Twist


                                                            Figure 34. Wing Deformations, Case 5.
                                                      Case 2: Wing-Body
                                                         Finest Grid
                                                       M=0.85, CL=0.50
 -0.4
                          Eta=0.131                                 -0.4
                                                                                    Eta=0.286                      -0.4
                                                                                                                                   Eta=0.502
                                  Original Test
                                  Enhanced Test
 -0.2                             All Solutions                     -0.2                                           -0.2
             CP
Cp




                                                                   Cp




                                                                                                                  Cp
                                  X/C

      0                                                                 0                                              0


 0.2                                                                0.2                                            0.2


 0.4                                                                0.4                                            0.4
   0.8             0.85         0.9           0.95      1             0.8    0.85         0.9         0.95    1      0.8    0.85         0.9         0.95    1
                                X/C                                                       X/C                                            X/C


 -0.4
                          Eta=0.603                                 -0.4
                                                                                    Eta=0.846                      -0.4
                                                                                                                                   Eta=0.950


 -0.2                                                               -0.2                                           -0.2
Cp




                                                                   Cp




                                                                                                                  Cp




      0                                                                 0                                              0


 0.2                                                                0.2                                            0.2


 0.4                                   0.4                            0.4
   0.8          Case0.93: Wing-Body
                   0.85    0.95  1    Wing
                                         0.8 Pressue
                                               0.85 0.9Distributions
                                                           0.95   1     0.8  0.85  0.9    0.95   1
                      X/C                           X/C                            X/C
                           All Solutions minus Outliers
          Figure 35. CRM Wing-Body   Trailing
                                M=0.85,       Edge Wing Pressures M=0.85, CL=0.50 – All Solutions.
                                          AOA=4.00

 -1.2
                          Eta=0.727                                 -1.2            Eta=0.846                      -1.2    Eta=0.950       Turbulence Model
                                                                                                                                                      SA
                                                 a=3.86, CL=0.62                                                                                      SA QCR
                                                 a=4.12, CL=0.64                                                                                      SST
                                                                                                                                                      k-kL
 -0.8                                                               -0.8                                           -0.8                               EARSM
                                                                                                                                                      LBM-VLES

 -0.4                                                               -0.4                                           -0.4
Cp




                                                                   Cp




                                                                                                                  Cp




      0                                                                 0                                              0


 0.4                                                                0.4                                            0.4

      0           0.2     0.4           0.6     0.8     1               0   0.2     0.4         0.6     0.8   1        0   0.2     0.4         0.6     0.8   1
                                X/C                                                       X/C                                            X/C

     Figure 36. CRM Wing-Body Pressure Distributions, M=0.85, =4°– All Solutions Minus Outliers.

                                                                              43
                                                      American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
