AIAA.2008-6919
Development of a Common Research Model
for Applied CFD Validation Studies
John C. Vassberg*, Mark A. DeHaan†
The Boeing Company, Huntington Beach, CA 92647
S. Melissa Rivers‡, Richard A. Wahls§
NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA 23681

Abstract
The development of a wing/body/nacelle/pylon/horizontal-tail configuration for a
common research model is presented, with focus on the aerodynamic design of the wing.
Here, a contemporary transonic supercritical wing design is developed with aerodynamic
characteristics that are well behaved and of high performance for configurations with and
without the nacelle/pylon group. The horizontal tail is robustly designed for dive Mach
number conditions and is suitably sized for typical stability and control requirements.
The fuselage is representative of a wide/body commercial transport aircraft; it includes a
wing-body fairing, as well as a scrubbing seal for the horizontal tail. The nacelle is a
single-cowl, high by-pass-ratio, flow-through design with an exit area sized to achieve a
natural unforced mass-flow-ratio typical of commercial aircraft engines at cruise. The
simplicity of this un-bifurcated nacelle geometry will facilitate grid generation efforts of
subsequent CFD validation exercises. Detailed aerodynamic performance data has been
generated for this model; however, this information is presented in such a manner as to
not bias CFD predictions planned for the fourth AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop,
which incorporates this common research model into its blind test cases. The CFD
results presented include wing pressure distributions with and without the nacelle/pylon,
ML/D trend lines, and drag-divergence curves; the design point for the wing/body
configuration is within 1% of its max-ML/D. Plans to test the common research model in
the National Transonic Facility and the Ames 11-ft wind tunnels are also discussed.

1.0 Introduction
The genesis of a common research model was motivated by a number of interested
parties asking NASA to help develop contemporary experimental databases for the
purpose of validating specific applications of computational fluid dynamics (CFD). For
example, the organizing committee of the international AIAA CFD Drag Prediction
Workshop (DPW) series1 is in need of new types of high-quality detailed experimental
data in order to better understand and help improve issues of numerical flow field
*

Boeing Technical Fellow, Associate Fellow AIAA.
Principal Engineer/Scientist
‡
Aerospace Engineer, Configuration Aerodynamics Branch, Senior Member AIAA
§
Project Scientist, Subsonic Fixed Wing / Fundamental Aeronautics Program, Associate Fellow AIAA
†

1

AIAA.2008-6919
simulations as related to the accuracy of drag and moment predictions. Due to the
success of the DPW series, other groups, such as the computational stability and control
(COMSAC) community, are interested in organizing similar workshops, and they too
have a need for very specific high-quality experimental data needed to validate CFD
predictions on a wide variety of items such as control-surface effectiveness, trim drag,
wind-tunnel (low) to flight (high) Reynolds number effects, and stability derivatives.
There is also a benefit for a common model to be tested at numerous wind tunnels to help
anchor the experimental measurements and correction methods between facilities.
NASA’s Subsonic Fixed Wing (SFW) Project within the Fundamental Aeronautics (FA)
Program has established a suite of discipline-oriented technical working groups (TWG)
as a way to facilitate the dissemination of technology, and coordinate research and
development within and outside of NASA. A TWG is not steering or advisory
committee, but rather a vehicle to transfer information and promote collaboration. The
primary focus of a TWG is on basic/foundational research and discipline tools and
technologies (e.g., aerodynamics) that tend to be at a cross-cutting, pre-competitive state,
but with an eye towards multidisciplinary subsystem and system-level activities.
The SFW Aerodynamics TWG in particular was formed and held its first meeting in
January 2007. The SFW Aerodynamics TWG membership currently consists of technical
leaders from US industry and government; in particular meeting participants have
included personnel from Boeing, Lockheed-Martin, Northrop-Grumman, Gulfstream,
Cessna, Hawker-Beechcraft, Pratt and Whitney, Air Force, Navy, and NASA. Among
the many topics discussed at the initial meeting was the idea of new benchmark
experiments on publicly available geometries suitable for cooperative assessment and
validation of aerodynamic prediction tools, framed much like the successful DPW series.
Specific input and general comments on this topic were received by the SFW Project
Aerodynamics leadership through June 2007, and shared and discussed within the TWG.
In addition to direct input from the TWG members, the input and experience of
international DPW Organizing Committee and discussion of next steps from the DPW
workshops and AIAA conference summary sessions were considered. Additionally,
thoughts on new initiatives along these lines from AIAA Applied Aero Technical
Committee and the NATO RTO Air Vehicle Technology groups were also considered.
Most conversation within the TWG focused on an open geometry high-speed wing
configuration building off lessons learned during the DPW series but defining a new
relevant geometry, acquiring new data rather than relying on existing limited data, and
ensuring a focus beyond cruise drag to include pitching-moment through a full and
relevant angle-of-attack range; additionally, wing-tail interaction was considered
important to address. Consideration was given to defining and focusing on a low-speed
high-lift or stability and control centric activity; in the end, it was felt such activities
could flow from an initial high-speed performance centric activity and resulting geometry
if such future activities were considered up front in configuration design. One of the
challenges of the DPW organizing committee, and honestly any such endeavor, was
identifying a modern, relevant geometry and having that geometry be publicly available –
this challenge tends to drive one towards the compromise of accepting older geometries

2

AIAA.2008-6919
in order to share widely and openly. In the case of the DPW, the newest geometry was
the DLR-F6 designed in the 1980s with a cruise Mach number of 0.75. As a result, the
TWG set out to characterize a new and relevant open geometry configuration to be
designed with state-of-the-art tools, and designed with physics and CFD validation as a
higher priority than minimizing drag – this philosophy drives some of the design
trades/features of the new configuration. This new configuration has come to be known
as the NASA Common Research Model (CRM).
The TWG addressed and debated features that characterize the CRM configuration and
model. First was discussion of a conventional, tube/wing configuration versus a hybrid
or blended wing/body configuration. It was felt that a conventional configuration would
be sufficiently challenging and relevant for aerodynamic prediction validation, based in
no small part on the challenges observed in the DPW series. Additionally, a conventional
configuration would likely ensure broader participation across industry at this juncture,
and that aerodynamic prediction lessons learned, for the most part, would be applicable to
hybrid wing/body configurations as well. Second, there was discussion of a high-wing
versus low-wing configuration; for similar reasons, the CRM is a low-wing
configuration. Third, it was decided to include a nacelle/pylon installation; however, it
was also decided to ensure a pertinent clean-wing design to enable study of a simpler
geometry that maintains relevant physics. It was recognized that today’s state-of-the-art
design tools are more than sufficient to enable a fully integrated/coupled design that
would enable minimized drag, but this step back in design philosophy was taken to
enable a simpler but still relevant wing-only case. Along similar lines, it was decided to
forgo flap-support fairings and winglets, though future integration of each should be
considered. Additionally, trailing-edge concepts to reduce drag, generally including
varying degrees of bluntness, are also not included in the name of simplicity; it was
acknowledged that an entire line of study could center on trailing-edge design and
modeling. Finally, a design Mach number of 0.85 was established; there was much
discussion on this topic with most interest falling between 0.80 and 0.90.
With this background, The Boeing Company took the lead on detailed aerodynamic
design of the CRM, while the NASA FA/SFW Project took the lead on model design,
fabrication, and testing of the CRM. The TWG continues to provide overarching
recommendations on overall direction and input at the technical detail level. The DPW
Organizing Committee is providing detailed technical input and providing the framework
and forum for an international assessment of CFD-based aerodynamic prediction tools
utilizing this new configuration.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the general layout of the full-scale
aircraft being represented by the CRM. Section 3 discusses the design and optimization
results of the CRM without divulging absolute performance metrics per aforementioned
reasons. Section 4 gives some details and status on the wind-tunnel model design and
fabrication, as well as provides a discussion of the envisioned, initial test plans to acquire
unique low and high Reynolds number data with modern test and measurement
capabilities that will be released into the public domain. Tables are embedded within the
body of text, while all figures are appended to the end of this report.

3

AIAA.2008-6919
2.0 General Layout and Detailed Geometry Description
After much discussion, the SFW TWG agreed that the CRM should be based on a
transonic transport configuration designed to fly at a cruise Mach number of M=0.85 with
a nominal lift condition of CL=0.50, and at a Reynolds number of Rn=40 million per
reference chord. They also specified that the wing should have an aspect-ratio of
AR=9.0, and a taper-ratio of λ=0.275. Additionally, the span should be sized accordingly
to integrate into an existing fuselage model. Accommodating these basic guidelines, the
derived reference quantities of the full-scale vehicle are given in Table 1. Note that Sref
is based on Wimpress area but the trap-wing area is also given. The resulting wing
planform is shown in Figure 1. This figure illustrates the side-of-body nominally at 10%
semispan and the yehudi break occurs at the 37% station. Table 2 provides detailed
airfoil information of the CRM wing at its 21 defining stations. These data correspond to
a nominal 1-G wing at cruise. The trailing-edge (TE) thickness is non-zero to
accommodate a minimum-gauge model fabrication constraint of 0.014 inches; at the
wingtip this results in a 0.48% thick TE base. The data of Table 2 are plotted in
Figures 2-6. Figure 2 depicts a side-view of the airfoil stack as rigged in the fuselage
reference plane. Figures 3-4 illustrate the non-dimensional and dimensional maxthickness distributions across the wing, respectively; the average non-dimensional
thickness of the exposed wing is about 10.8%. Figure 5 gives the max-camber
distribution. Note that the outboard wing carries supercritical airfoil sections with about
1.5% camber. Figure 6 shows the wing’s twist distribution and indicates that the wing is
washed out about 8 degrees from side-of-body to wingtip. Figures 7-8 provide chordwise
thickness and camber distributions for airfoil geometries at the yehudi break (37%
semispan) and on the outboard wing (75% semispan), respectively. Although similar
geometric details for the fuselage, horizontal-tail, and nacelle/pylon components are not
included in this report, Figures 9-10 illustrate their integration into the
wing/body/nacelle/pylon/horizontal-tail (WBNPH) configuration of the CRM.

Table 1: Reference Quantities for the CRM.
Sref
Trap-Wing Area
Cref
Span
Xref
Yref
Zref
λ
ΛC/4
AR

594,720.0 in2
576,000.0 in2
275.80 in
2,313.50 in
1,325.90 in
468.75 in
177.95 in
0.275
35°
9.0

4

4,130.0 ft2
4,000.0 ft2
192.8 ft

AIAA.2008-6919
Table 2: Detailed Geometric Data for the CRM Wing.

3.0 Aerodynamic Design
Based on input from the SFW TWG, a contemporary supercritical transonic wing has
been designed for the CRM. The fuselage is representative of a wide-body commercial
transport aircraft; it includes a wing-body fairing, as well as a scrubbing seal for the
horizontal tail. In addition to the geometric criteria discussed in the previous section, the
TWG requested a wing design suitable for a flight condition of 0.85M, CL=0.5, and a
chord Reynolds number of 40 million. Furthermore, this wing design should exhibit
fairly high performance over a reasonable neighborhood of the design point (i.e., not be a
single-point design). For example, between step climbs, a typical commercial transport
will experience lift coefficients that range on the order of +/-0.02 about its nominal cruise
point, as the aircraft burns fuel at a given altitude. When a certain amount of fuel is
burned at that altitude, the aircraft will climb to the next allowable discrete altitude, and
the process repeats. Additionally, the wing design must accommodate a 1.3-Gs to buffet
criteria; and the list of requirements continues. Another attribute worth noting is that a
typical airline will fly aircraft at a higher Mach number than that of the optimum range
condition; burning up to 1% more fuel. While range factor is also influenced by the
specific fuel consumption of the engines and the aircraft structural weight, in this context
where only aerodynamic performance is known, we use maximum ML/D as a surrogate
for maximum range. Hence, we seek a wing whose design-point ML/D is within 1% of
its maximum value. An additional requirement of the TWG was that the aerodynamic
characteristics of the configuration with and without nacelle/pylon (NP) group be well
behaved. The two primary drivers for the requirement of a good wing/body (WB) design
are that, 1) it provides a simpler case for validation studies, and 2) it is more
representative of low-wing configurations with aft-fuselage mounted engines, such as
business jet aircraft.
Hence, the approach taken here is to first develop a high5

AIAA.2008-6919
performance wing in the presence of only the fuselage, then after the fact, integrate the
nacelle/pylon group without introducing undesirable installation effects. This represents
a step backward relative to our current design practices for under-wing mounted engines,
but nonetheless this approach was required to best satisfy the requirements of the TWG.
SYN107 was utilized to facilitate the rapid design and optimization of the CRM wing in
the presence of the fuselage. (SYN107 is a CFD-based synthesis code developed by
Jameson2.) Numerous multipoint optimizations were conducted that included a range of
Mach and lifting conditions. For example, a typical 5-point optimization included
(M, CL) values of: (0.85, 0.50), (0.85, 0.48), (0.85, 0.52), (0.84, 0.50), and (0.86, 0.50).
These optimizations were conducted with constraints on wing thickness and spanload
distributions. The objective function of these optimizations included a blend of weighted
drag minimization and target pressures. Once these optimizations were completed, the
resulting wing geometry was extracted from the SYN107 grid and projected onto the 21
defining stations of Table 2. Later, this wing definition was surfaced to create an IGES
representation of the geometry, and delivered to NASA for the purpose of model design.
Figures 11-13 provide pressure distributions for the CRM wing at its design point, based
on an OVERFLOW solution of the WB configuration. (OVERFLOW is a ReynoldsAveraged Navier-Stokes CFD method based on overset grids developed by NASA3.)
Figure 12 provides a top/bottom view of the wing upper/lower surface isobars. Note that
the upper-surface shock system in the mid-span region is swept essentially along a
constant X/C element line, while on the outboard wing reduces in strength. This
character can also be seen in the detailed pressure distributions provided by Figure 13 at
the slightly-off-design condition of CL=0.49 and 0.85M.
A fairly comprehensive set of flight conditions surrounding the design point were also
analyzed. These OVERFLOW CFD results are given in Figures 14-16. Figure 14 shows
the ML/D trend lines for five different Mach numbers as a function of lift coefficient.
The large blue dot at CL=0.50 on the M=0.85 trend line highlights the design point. Note
that by observation, it appears that the maximum ML/D point occurs somewhere near
CL=0.47 and M=0.85. This max-ML/D point is shown as the maroon dot in
Figures 15-16. Also provided in these figures is the 99% max-ML/D contour line for
reference. Note that the CRM design point falls within this contour. Figure 15 depicts
three drag-rise curves for CL=[0.40, 0.45, 0.50]. Figure 16 shows a representative point
(green dot) where an airline might trade 1% fuel burn for an additional 0.006 in cruise
Mach number. In fact, one should not read too much into this data as it is subject to
change with the inclusion of the remaining nacelle/pylon and horizontal-tail components.
These characteristics are included here for the primary purpose to illustrate that the wing
design is fairly robust for a wide range of flow conditions.
As a final note regarding the CRM wing design, Figures 17-18 provide the installation
effects of the nacelle/pylon group on the wing pressures, as computed by TRANAIR4.
The nacelle developed for the CRM is a single-cowl, flow-through design with an exit
area sized to achieve a natural unforced mass-flow-ratio typical of commercial aircraft
engines at cruise. The simplicity of the un-bifurcated internal geometry is partially

6

AIAA.2008-6919
motivated to minimize grid-generation efforts for future CFD validation exercises.
Figure 17 illustrates the wing upper-surface isobars with and without the nacelle/pylon
installed. Figure 18 provides the chordwise pressure distributions at eight span stations
for the configuration with and without the nacelle/pylon. The solid curves correspond to
the wing/body/nacelle/pylon solution, while the dashed curves represent the wing/body
results. Note that the stations at 27.0% and 38.6% semispan straddle the nacelle/pylon
location. With focus on these two subplots, one can see that the nacelle/pylon induces
additional up-wash on the inboard wing leading edge, while reducing it outboard. The
inboard influence extends all the way to the fuselage, while the outboard perturbations
quickly decay with increasing semispan location; for all practical purposes, this influence
is insignificant beyond mid-span. The TRANAIR and OVERFLOW solutions both
confirm that the SYN107 optimizations have produced a robust and high-performance
wing design.
The horizontal tail has been designed with consideration given to be robust at dive Mach
number conditions; it is suitably sized for typical stability and control requirements. The
general layout of the horizontal tail has a trapezoidal planform with a quarter-chord
sweep of 37°, a taper-ratio of 0.35, a mean-aerodynamic chord of 184.7 inches, a span of
840 inches, and an area of 1,000 ft2. The horizontal is defined with two symmetric airfoil
sections, a 10%-thick section at the plane-of-symmetry and an 8%-thick airfoil at its tip.
The incidence of the tip section is twisted 3° leading-edge up relative to the root airfoil,
to provide adequate wash-out for this downward-lifting surface. In addition to the airfoil
stack, a hinge line is specified for the horizontal such that its contact with the side of
fuselage remains sealed. Figure 19 provides pressure distributions for the horizontal tail
at the three incidence settings of iH={-2.0°, 0.0°, +2.0°}. For reference, the WBNPH
configuration with a center-of-gravity position at about 28% mean-aerodynamic chord is
in static trim for an iH=0.0° per the TRANAIR solutions of Figure 19.

4.0 Plans for Wind-Tunnel Testing
In July 2008, NASA awarded a contract for the detailed design and fabrication of new
wind tunnel model hardware for the CRM configuration. New wing, nacelle/pylon
group, and horizontal-tail components as described above will be combined with an
existing fuselage to enable tests of WB and WBNP configurations with and without a
horizontal tail; three tail incidence angles will be available to determine the trimmed
condition. The model will include 303 wing pressures located at 8 spanwise stations, and
6 pressures in the left-hand nacelle; note that the wing pressures will be distributed
between left and right wings in such a manner as to minimize any differences due to
asymmetric static aeroelastic twist or bending. The model will be mounted using an
existing upper-swept-blade support that enters the fuselage in the location of a vertical
tail, but is enlarged relative to a scaled vertical tail in order to safely handle model loads.
Currently, the new model parts are scheduled for delivery in the 1st quarter of calendar
year 2009.

7

AIAA.2008-6919
As mentioned before, the CRM and associated test plans evolved from a combination of
several goals/objectives: 1) a new relevant geometry, 2) acquire new data with modern
test and measurement capabilities rather than relying on existing limited data, and 3)
ensuring a focus beyond cruise drag to include pitching-moment through a full and
relevant angle-of-attack range. The new geometry is directly addressed by the model
itself as described above. A focus including but not limited to cruise drag is ensured by
inclusion of tails to generate moment increments, and test plans to include a full range of
angle-of-attack. New data acquired with modern test and measurement capabilities can
imply many things, but here specifically addresses: 1) acquisition of data across a large
range of Reynolds number from conventional wind tunnel levels to flight, and 2)
acquisition of data on an aircraft configuration beyond standard force/moment and
surface pressure data. The high Reynolds number data will be sufficiently high to ensure
fully turbulent flow from the leading-edge; the intent is to eliminate the computational
question of how to simulate fixed or natural transition and any question about the
influence or intrusiveness of a selected transition fixing method on wind tunnel results.
Data acquisition beyond the conventional indicates a desire to acquire skin friction data,
and off-body mean and unsteady data for comparison to computational simulations with
the goal to enable improvements in predictions.
To address these goals, it is currently planned for the CRM to be tested in the NASA
Ames 11-ft transonic wind tunnel and the NASA National Transonic Facility (NTF) at
Langley. The NTF will include cryogenic runs to acquire high Reynolds number data,
while the 11-ft facility will provide skin friction and off-body data at a lower Reynolds
number. The chord Reynolds number will be 5 million in the Ames 11-ft. and will range
from 3 to 30 million in NTF. The test matrix in each facility will include a range of
Mach numbers from 0.70 to 0.92 with focus on the design point of 0.85M. The
configurations to be tested include WB, the WBNP, and the WBH with the horizontal-tail
at three different incidence settings. The plan is to acquire force, moment, and surface
pressure, plus wing deformation under load in each facility. In the Ames 11-ft, off-body
flowfield velocities will be collected via Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), and skin
friction data collected via a fringe imaging skin-friction interferometry (FISFI) method;
each of these methods has been used previously in the facility. The current test plan
includes approximately 4,500 points in the NTF and nearly 2,100 points in the Ames
11-ft test; note that the specialized data to be acquired in the 11-foot requires more time
on point than conventional data. In order to connect the datasets between tunnels, a
common Reynolds number and equivalent aeroelastic shape must be ensured. Figure 20
provides an operating chart for the Ames 11-ft wind tunnel. Included in this figure is the
selected operating condition for the CRM, depicted by the yellow dot at 0.85M and
Reynolds number of approximately 8 million per foot, or 5 million based on the mean
aerodynamic chord. Conditions in the NTF air mode of operation will also provide a
chord Reynolds number of 5 million, at essentially the same dynamic pressure of 1,325
psf, thus providing consistent static aeroelastic deformation of the model as well.
The NTF is able to independently control Mach number, Reynolds number, and dynamic
pressure through independent control of pressure, temperature, and velocity; this
capability enables study of pure Reynolds number, compressibility, or static aeroelastic

8

AIAA.2008-6919
effects. Holding Mach number and Q/E constant, where E is the model material modulus
of elasticity and is a function of temperature, while varying only Reynolds number
enables isolation of pure Reynolds number effects. Similarly, an a pure aeroelastic effect
can be obtained in the NTF by keeping the Mach and Reynolds number constant while
varying only Q/E. Table 3 in conjunction with Figures 21-22 illustrate the operating
conditions planned for the CRM in order to obtain pure Reynolds-number effects as well
as pure aeroelastic effects. Figure 22 is a close-up of Figure 21 in the pertinent operating
range. Note that between the first (yellow dot) and second (green dot) operating
conditions, Q/E is held at a constant value of 0.349 x10-6, while the Reynolds number
increases from 5 to 19.8 million. Between the second and third (light-blue dot)
conditions, the Reynolds number is held at a constant value of 19.8 million, while Q/E
varies from 0.349 to 0.507 x10-6. The higher value of Q/E will cause a higher deflection
(bending and twist) of the wing at a given CL. Finally, another pure Reynolds-number
sweep is performed between the third and fourth (dark-blue dot) operating conditions.
Currently, the NTF test is planned for the 2nd quarter of calendar year 2009 with the
Ames 11-foot test to occur in the first half of government fiscal year 2010. In addition to
the currently planned tests for the Ames 11-ft and the NTF, it is envisioned that the CRM
can be made available for cooperative tests sponsored by other organizations (beyond
NASA) in other facilities around the world that world that can add additional, and ideally
unique, data to the public dataset for the CRM configuration.
Table 3: CRM Operating Conditions at 0.85M in the
NTF with Key Codes for Figures 21-22.

5.0 Summary
A contemporary transonic supercritical wing has been developed for the NASA CRM
wing/body/nacelle/pylon/horizontal-tail configuration. Aerodynamic characteristics of
the CRM wing design are well behaved and of high performance for configurations with
and without the nacelle/pylon group. The horizontal tail is robustly designed for dive
Mach number conditions and is suitably sized for typical stability and control
requirements. The fuselage is representative of a wide/body commercial transport
aircraft; it includes a wing-body fairing, as well as a scrubbing seal for the horizontal tail.
The nacelle is a large-diameter single-cowl flow-through design with an exit area sized to
achieve a natural unforced mass-flow-ratio typical of commercial aircraft engines at
9

AIAA.2008-6919
cruise. The simplicity of this un-bifurcated nacelle geometry will facilitate grid
generation efforts of subsequent CFD validation exercises. Detailed aerodynamic
performance data has been generated for this model; however, this information is
presented in such a manner as to not bias CFD predictions planned for the fourth AIAA
CFD Drag Prediction Workshop, which incorporates this common research model into its
blind test cases. The CFD results presented include wing pressure distributions with and
without the nacelle/pylon, ML/D trend lines, and drag-divergence curves; the design
point for the wing/body configuration is within 1% of its max-ML/D. Plans to test the
common research model in the NTF and the Ames 11-ft wind tunnels are also discussed.
The time tables of these wind-tunnel tests facilitate the blind test cases of DPW-IV based
on the CRM, and yet, will allow comparisons of the CFD results with some experimental
data shortly after this workshop is conducted.

6.0 Acknowledgements
The aerodynamic design of the CRM wing, horizontal tail, and nacelle/pylon group is
provided by The Boeing Company. The design, fabrication, and testing of the CRM
wind-tunnel model is being funded by the NASA Fundamental Aeronautics Program.
The first author thanks Professor Antony Jameson of Stanford University for his
collaboration and contributions to this project. The CRM nacelle/pylon design and
integration were conducted by Peg Curtin and Ben Rider of Boeing Commercial Aircraft;
Ben Rider also provided the TRANAIR results shown herein.

References
1. AIAA CFD Drag Prediction Workshop
website: http://aaac.larc.nasa.gov/tsab/cfdlarc/aiaa-dpw/
email:
dpw@cessna.textron.com/
2. A Jameson & JC Vassberg. Computational Fluid Dynamics for Aerodynamic
Design: Its Current and Future Impact. AIAA Paper 2001-0538, Reno, NV, 2001.
3. PG Buning, DC Jespersen, TH Pulliam, WM Chan, JP Slotnick, SE Krist, & KJ
Renze. OVERFLOW User’s Manual, Version 1.81. NASA Report, NASA Langley
Research Center, Hampton, VA, 1999.
4. SS Samant, JE Bussoletti, FT Johnson, RH Burkhart, BL Everson, RG Melvin & DP
Young. TRANAIR: A Computer Code for Transonic Analysis of Arbitrary
Configurations. AIAA Paper 87-0034, Reno, NV, January, 1987.

10

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 1: Full-Scale Planform of the CRM Wing.

Figure 2: Airfoil Stack for the CRM Wing.
11

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 3: Non-Dimensional Thickness Distribution of the CRM Wing.

Figure 4: Dimensional Thickness Distribution of the CRM Wing.
12

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 5: Max-Camber Distribution of the CRM Wing.

Figure 6: Twist Distribution of the CRM Wing.
13

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 7: Airfoil Characteristics at the Yehudi Break Station of the CRM Wing.

14

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 8: Airfoil Characteristics at an Outboard Station of the CRM Wing.

15

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 9: CRM Wing/Body/Nacelle/Pylon/Horizontal-Tail Configuration.

Figure 10: Front View of the CRM showing the Large-Diameter Flow-Through Nacelle.

16

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 11: OVERFLOW Isobars of the CRM Wing/Body at the Design Point.

Lower Surface

Upper Surface

Figure 12: OVERFLOW Isobars of the CRM Wing/Body at the Design Point.

17

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 13: OVERFLOW Wing Pressure Distributions of the CRM Wing/Body.

Figure 14: OVERFLOW ML/D Trends for the CRM Wing/Body.

18

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 15: OVERFLOW Drag Rises for the CRM Wing/Body.

Figure 16: Contour of 99% Max-ML/D for the CRM Wing/Body.
19

AIAA.2008-6919

WB

WBNP

Figure 17: TRANAIR Results of Nacelle-Pylon Effect on Wing Upper-Surface Isobars.

Figure 18: TRANAIR Results of Nacelle-Pylon Effect on CRM Wing Pressures.

20

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 19: TRANAIR Results of CRM Horizontal-Tail Pressures.

Figure 20: Ames 11-ft WT Operating Chart with CRM Rnc=5 million Test Condition.

21

AIAA.2008-6919

Figure 21: NTF Operating Chart with CRM Test Condition Range.

Figure 22: Close-Up View of Figure 21 better showing CRM Test Condition Range.
22

