        Potsdam Propeller CFD Benchmark

Daniel LaCroix                                                                      Radek Máca
dlacroix@pointwise.com                                               radek.maca@cfdsupport.com



This report presents the benchmark validation of CFD simulation results of the ​Potsdam Propeller
Test Case (PPTC)​, using ​TCFD®​ ​with ​POINTWISE®​ mesh. PPTC is a marine propulsor that was
extensively measured by ​SVA Potsdam and related data were published [1] [2] [3]. The aim of this
benchmark was to evaluate the TCFD®​ ​, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software, on the very
advanced mesh, created in POINTWISE®​ ​, mesh generation software, and to compare the results
with the measurement data available. The particular goal of this benchmark is to compare the
propeller ​Efficiency, Torque Coefficient, and Thrust Coefficient ​vs. ​Advance Coefficient ​with
the real experimental measurement of ​SVA Potsdam Laboratory​.

KEYWORDS: POTSDAM PROPELLER, CFD, MESH, VALIDATION, BENCHMARK, TCFD,
SIMULATION,   POINTWISE,    ADVANCED   MESH,    EXTERNAL,    TURBOMACHINERY,
HYDRODYNAMICS, PROPELLER, SHIP, PROPULSION, INCOMPRESSIBLE, FLUID, FLOW, RANS,
WATER, STEADY-STATE, WATERFLOW, AUTOMATION




Benchmark Parameters
    ●   Mean flow speed: ​4 m/s                     ●   Reference density: ​997.71 kg/m3​
    ●   Rotation speed: ​900 RPM                    ●                                 ​ ​ Pa⋅s
                                                        Dynamic viscosity: ​9.559 × 10-4
    ●   Flow model: in​compressible                 ●   CPU Time:​ 30 core.hours/point
    ●   Mesh size: ​4.1 M cells                     ●   Turbulence: ​RANS
    ●   Medium: ​water                              ●   Turbulence model:​ kOmegaSST
    ●   Speedlines: ​1                              ●   Simulation type: ​Propeller
    ●   Simulation points:​ 11                      ●   Time management: ​steady-state
    ●   Fluid: ​Water                               ●   Number of components: ​2
    ●   Reference pressure: ​1 atm                  ●   Wall treatment:​ Wall functions
Potsdam Propeller CFD Benchmark Description

The high demand for improving the accuracy, quality, and credibility of the CFD simulation
results, should be assessed by providing a high qualitative and intensive comparison with
experimental measurement data.
The purpose of this benchmark is the validation of CFD simulation software ​TCFD​® ​with the
mesh created in high-end meshing software ​POINTWISE​® and to compare the results with the
measurement data available. ​Potsdam Propeller Test Case (PPTC) is a marine propulsor that
was extensively measured by ​SVA Potsdam​ and related data were published in [1], [2], and [3].
The particular goal of this benchmark is to compare the propeller Efficiency, Torque Coefficient,
and Thrust Coefficient vs. Advance Coefficient with the real experimental measurement of ​SVA
Potsdam Laboratory​. The experimental investigation includes open water test and velocity field
measurements at different operation conditions. A detailed description of the open water tests




conducted at the towing tank of the SVA is presented in the SVA report [1], which can be found
on the SVA website (​sva-potsdam.de​).
At the propeller analysis, there are a few important dimensionless numbers. Those are Advance
Coefficient, Thrust Coefficient, Torque Coefficient, and Efficiency. They are defined as
(respectively):

       V                      T                         Q                     JK
J = n · aD    ,    K T = ρ · n2 · D4    ,   K Q = ρ · n2 · D5     ,   η 0 = 2π · KT
                                                                                      Q



Where Va is the advance speed [m/s], n is the speed of rotation [1/s], D is propeller diameter
[m], T is thrust [N], ϱ is water density [kg/m3], Q is torque [Nm]. The measurement results are
available for Advance coefficients from J = 0.5 to 1.6 and the simulation points are chosen
accordingly. Altogether, 11 Advance Coefficient modes were simulated according to the
measurements.
Mesh
An unstructured viscous computational mesh was constructed with Pointwise on the Potsdam
propeller geometry as part of this TCFD validation benchmark. Pointwise, Inc. has previously
worked with variants of the geometry for other studies. For an in-depth discussion of Pointwise
technology and how it can be used for this particular geometry, please consult [4].

A combination of anisotropic and isotropic triangles were used in the surface mesh
discretization. Areas of high curvature - such as the leading edge, trailing edge, and the tip-
were resolved by utilizing Pointwise’s T-Rex algorithm. This tool grows anisotropically
stretched, right-angled triangles layered in the normal direction to a boundary [5], as shown
below. Using this, areas of high curvature are able to be resolved without the need to
isotropically refine the area. The result is an accurate adherence to the surface and a reduction
in the point count. The interior of the surface mesh was resolved with isotropic triangles
created using a modified Delaunay algorithm.




After meshing the geometry, the outer boundary of the moving reference frame (MRF) as well as the
outer boundary of the computational domain were meshed utilizing isotropic triangles and the Delaunay
algorithm. The MRF is cylindrical domain approximately 4.8 D long (4.8x the propeller diameter) and 1.5 D
in diameter. It starts just upstream of the propeller and extends downstream into the wake. A farfield
block was generated outside of the MRF corresponding to 10 D and 2.6 D; these were the limits taken
from the file provided.
The volume mesh is a combination of a prismatic core surrounded by isotropic tetrahedral cells. The
prismatic portions of the grid were initialized using T-Rex. Starting from the surface mesh, anisotropic
tetrahedral cells were grown until reaching a desired stop criteria, colliding with another front, or
violating quality criteria. If an element stops advancing this did not prevent adjacent elements from
continuing. After the tetrahedral layers are grown, the cells are combined to form prisms (or hexagons if
the surface mesh is made up of quadrilateral cells). This reduces the total cell count of the mesh without
sacrificing quality. Once the near-wall viscous mesh was generated, the remainder of the volume was
populated with isotropic tetrahedral cells. The total cell count was just below 4.1 million cells. The
average maximum included angle was 101, and the maximum was 170. The average volume ratio was 1.8
with a maximum of 28.




The data for the mesh is included in the table.


 Mesh Elements          points            faces        internal faces   faces per cell     hexahedra

        #              1018546          8753113          8434441          4.203379            2052

 Mesh Elements          prisms          pyramids        tet wedges        polyhedra           cells

        #              788137            39373               0                0             4,088,985
TCFD​®​ Simulation Setup

The simulation run in TCFD is quite straightforward. The external mesh, created in POINTWISE,
is simply loaded and the simulation parameters are set. The simulation type is the ​propeller​.
Time management is ​steady-state​. The fluid flow model is ​incompressible​. The mesh has ​two




components (the water tunnel and the cylinder with
propeller inside) of total ​4.1M cells. The inlet flow velocity
defines the advance coefficient and the velocity varies
from ​1.7 to ​5.9 m/s in ​11 points. The outlet boundary
condition is static pressure. For turbulence modeling, the
RANS modeling approach has been used with the ​k-omega
SST turbulence model with the wall functions. The fluid
properties of water are selected. The density of 997.71
kg/m3. Dynamic viscosity of 9.559e-4 Pa.s.


TCFD​®​ Simulation Post-processing
TCFD​® includes a built-in post-processing module that
automatically evaluates the required total quantities, such
as propeller efficiency, thrust coefficient, torque
coefficient, forces, force coefficients, flow rates, and much
more. All these quantities are evaluated throughout the
simulation run, and all the important data is summarized in
tabled .csv files as well as in the HTML report, which can be
updated anytime during the simulation for every run.
Furthermore, visual postprocessing of the volume fields
can be done with ParaView.
Efficiency, Thrust & Torque Coefficient vs. Advance Coefficient
A propeller is the most common propulsor on ships, imparting momentum to a fluid which
causes a force to act on the ship. The most comprehensive propeller performance information
is provided by displaying all the key characteristics into one graph.




Conclusion
The CFD analysis of the PPTC was performed successfully. It has been shown that the TCFD​®
in connection with POINTWISE​® provides very accurate results that are in perfect agreement
with the measurement data.

All the simulation and measurement data are freely available. Potential questions about
TCFD​® are to be sent to ​info@cfdsupport.com​. Questions about POINTWISE​® are to be sent to
pointwise@pointwise.com​.

[1] Barkmann, U., Potsdam Propeller Test Case (PPTC) - Open Water Tests with the Model Propeller
VP1304, Report 3752, SchiffbauVersuchsanstalt Potsdam, April 2011
[2] Barkmann, U., Heinke, H.-J., Potsdam Propeller Test Case (PPTC) Test Case Description, Second
International Symposium on Marine Propulsors smp’11, Hamburg, Germany, June 2011, Workshop:
Propeller performance
[3] Heinke, H.-J., Potsdam Propeller Test Case (PPTC), Cavitation Tests with the Model Propeller
VP1304, Report 3753, SchiffbauVersuchsanstalt Potsdam, April 2011
[4] Carrigan, T., Bagheri, B., “A Study of the Influence of Meshing Strategies on CFD Simulation
Efficiency,” NAFEMS World Congress 2017, NWC17-466, 2017.
[5] Steinbrenner, J. P. and Abelanet, J.P., "Anisotropic Tetrahedral Meshing Based on Surface
Deformation Techniques," AIAA-20060554, AIAA 45th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV.
