Xu, W. and Chen, Q. 2000. “Simulation of mixed convection flow in a room with a two-layer
turbulence model”, Indoor Air, 10, 306-314.

Simulation of Mixed Convection Flow in a Room
with a Two-Layer Turbulence Model
WEIRAN XU AND QINGYAN CHEN*
Abstract Most indoor airflows are mixed convection. In order to simulate mixed
convection accurately and efficiently, this paper uses a two-layer turbulence model. The
two-layer model combines a one-equation model for near wall flow together with the
standard k-ε model for outer-wall flow. The model has been used to predict the mixed
convection by displacement ventilation in an office. The computed results agree well
with the corresponding airflow pattern and the distributions of air temperature, air
velocity, air velocity fluctuation, and tracer-gas concentration. The model can predict
correctly heat transfer from a wall where the standard k-ε model and re-normalization
group (RNG) k-ε model with wall functions often fails. The computing cost required by
the two-layer model is comparable to that of the standard k-ε model and RNG k-ε model
and is significantly less than that by a low-Reynolds number model.
Practical Implications
This paper presents a new two-layer model that can be used to calculate natural, forced,
and mixed convection flow in a room. The model can predict correctly room airflow and
heat transfer while use similar numerical grid cells as the standard k-ε model. It is
particularly useful for rooms with many heated or cooled surfaces. This is because the
computing costs are not higher than that with the standard k-ε model, but the computed
air flow and heat transfer are more accurate.
Key words CFD; turbulence modeling; validation; displacement ventilation; office
rooms.

Nomenclature
Ary

C
C1ε, C2ε, C3ε
Cμ

local Archimedes number, gβΔTy n /U 2
Contaminant concentration
constants used in the ε equation
constant used for calculating νt

Building Technology Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Mass. Ave.,
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, U.S.A., Tel: 1-617-253-7714, Fax: 1-617-253-6152.
*

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.

1

dk
flμ, flε, fvv
gi
Gk

diffusion of turbulent kinetic energy
functions used in the one-equation model
component i of the gravitation vector
gravity production of turbulent kinetic energy, − βgi ui t

k
l, lμ, lε
Pk

turbulent kinetic energy, ui ui / 2
characteristic lengths
shear production of the turbulent kinetic energy, − ui u j ∂U i ∂x j

Prt
T
t
Ui, Uj
U, V, W
u, v
xi, xj
x, y, z
yn
y*

turbulent Prandtl number
mean temperature
fluctuating temperature or time
component i and j of the mean velocity
mean velocity component in x, y and z direction
fluctuating velocity component in x, y direction
spatial coordinate in i and j direction
spatial coordinate
normal distance to the nearest wall
dimensionless wall distance, yn k / ν

Greek Symbols

β

thermal expansion coefficient, −

ε
ν
νt
σk, σε

turbulent energy dissipation
molecular viscosity
turbulent viscosity
Prandtl number of k and ε

Subscripts
i, j
in
t

spatial coordinate indices
inlet
turbulent quantities

1 ∂ρ
ρ ∂T

Introduction
Design of an acceptable indoor environment requires detailed information of
indoor air distribution, thermal comfort, indoor air quality, etc. The information includes
air velocity, temperature, contaminant concentration, turbulence intensity, etc. that can be
predicted by computational fluid dynamics (CFD). The CFD application to indoor
environment design has enjoyed a great success in the past two decades. However, there are
still some uncertainties in the CFD results. This is because most indoor airflows are
turbulent. A turbulence model should be used in the CFD to make the flow solvable with the
present computer capacity and speed. Unfortunately, the existing turbulence models are

2

either inaccurate (such as the standard k-ε model (Launder and Spalding 1974) or
inefficient (such as low-Reynolds number standard k-ε models and Reynolds stress
models) to predict indoor airflow.
Most indoor airflows involve three types of convection: forced, natural and mixed
convection. For example, the flow from an air-conditioning device is forced convection,
and the thermal plumes around the equipment or exterior walls and windows are natural
convection. In a typical air-conditioned office with equipment or exterior walls, the
airflow is mixed convection. Hence, it is desirable to develop a turbulence model that can
predict accurately and effectively these three types of flow. This paper presents a twolayer turbulence model (Xu 1998) that performs two tasks:
1) The model can accurately predict indoor airflows under various conditions, i.e., from
purely forced to purely natural convection airflows (Xu 1998). This model allows
designers to use one single model to calculate indoor airflows instead of selecting
different turbulence models empirically from many available models.
2) The model can be more efficient than available turbulence models, such as lowReynolds-number k-ε models and Reynolds stress models.

Review of Previous Work
Purely forced and natural convection can be viewed as two extreme cases of
mixed convection. Mixed convection is more complicated than forced convection and
natural convection since it combines the complexity of both. Turbulent forced convection
has been extensively studied and most turbulence models are developed for forced flows.
This section reviews the state-of-art studies of turbulent mixed convection and identifies
the problems with the existing turbulence models.
Studies on turbulent mixed convection fall into three categories: theoretical
analysis, experimental investigation and numerical simulation. Theoretical studies
include those by Nakajima et al. (1980), Chen et al. (1987) and Aicher and Martin
(1997). Nakajima et al. (1980) and Chen et al. (1987) independently proposed damping
functions similar to Van Driest’s (1956) to enable the mixing-length model to count the
buoyancy effects. They also conducted an experiment in a long channel to study basic
turbulence and heat transfer characteristics of mixed convection. Aicher and Martin
(1997) proposed two heat transfer correlations for the mixed convection in a tube. These
studies provided some physical insights to understand the mixed convection. For
example, Nakajima and Fukui (1980) found that the heat transfer in the boundary layer of
a plate was decreased when the plate was slightly heated. Aicher and Martin (1997)
suggested that the decrease is due to the reduction of the turbulent energy in the boundary
layer.
Experimental investigations on turbulent mixed convection are very few. The
only notable contributions are those by Schwenke (1975) and Blay et al. (1992).
Schwenke (1975) conducted a series of measurements in a ventilated room with a heated
wall. He measured the penetration length, which is the length of how far the air stream
from a diffuser can propagate against the buoyancy-induced wall jet. He found that the
energy imposed on the heated wall had a significant impact on the airflow pattern. This

3

case can represent the airflow in a typical ventilated room with a hot window. Blay et al.
(1992) measured the mixed convection flow in a two-dimensional cavity. Their measured
quantities include velocities, temperatures and velocity fluctuations at mid-width and midheight plane of the cavity.
Many researches have contributed to the numerical simulations of mixed
convection. Nielsen et al. (1979) used the standard k-ε model with wall functions and
calculated the flows in a ventilated room with floor heating. This early attempt showed
the great potential of numerical simulation and it was considered a milestone in applying
the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) technique to indoor airflow simulations.
Many other researchers have applied low-Reynolds-number k-ε models to
calculate mixed convection flows in vertical pipes (Jackson et al. 1990), vertical channels
(Inagaki and Komori, 1995; Fedorov et al., 1997), vertical boundary layers (Patel et al.
1996), and cavities (To and Humphrey, 1986; Blay et al., 1992). Their computational
results have been compared with corresponding experimental data and the agreement has
been reasonably good. However, the computing costs in those applications were very
high. For example, To and Humphrey (1986) found that at least five grids are needed in
the viscous sublayer and 17 in the buffer layer to produce acceptable results.
Chen (1995) systematically compared the performance of several k-ε models on
indoor airflow simulation and found that the performance of various turbulence models
was so diverse that no model can be used universally. For example, he found the RNG kε model performed best in mixed convection but very poor in forced convection flows.
His study included a two-layer model from Rodi (1991). Since the model was developed
for forced convection flow, it performed poorly for natural and mixed convection flows
in rooms. Therefore, it is important to develop a model that could work for forced,
natural, and mixed convection flows normally found indoors.
Very few researchers have attempted to apply the Reynolds-stress models on
indoor airflow simulations. Chen (1996) found that the performance of the three
Reynolds number model in mixed convection do not perform much better than the RNG
k-ε models.
In summary, for turbulent mixed convection, few theoretical and experimental
studies exist due to its complexity. Most numerical simulations on the mixed convection
have employed various versions of the low-Reynolds-number k-ε models while few
others have applied the Reynolds stress models. The computing efforts required by a lowReynolds-number k-ε models or a Reynolds stress model are much higher than the
standard k-ε model and RNG k-ε model (Xu and Chen 1998 and Chen 1996). An
accurate and cost-effective turbulence model is not available.

Turbulence Model
In order to predict accurate mixed convection flow in a room with reasonable
computing costs, Xu (1998) recently used the data of direct numerical simulation from
(Kasagi and Nishimura, 1997) to develop a new two-layer model. In addition to the
directional numerical simulation data, this new model is based on the two-layer model for
forced convection flow (Rodi 1991) and another for natural convection flow (Xu et al.

4

1998). Hence, the model should work for forced, natural, and mixed convection flows
found indoors. This section briefly introduces the model.
A two-layer model consists of two turbulence models. This paper uses a single kequation turbulence model for near wall flow and the standard k-ε model for the flow in
outer-wall region. The criteria to switch the model from one to the other is the y* value.
If y*<y*prescribed the single-equation model applies; otherwise, the standard k-ε model will
be used. y*prescribed = 80 was found to be the best for room airflows.
In the near-wall region, where y*<80, the new one equation model is used; i.e., the
k is solved by Eq. (1), i.e.,
∂k
∂k
+ Ui
= d k + Pk + Gk − ε
(1)
∂t
∂xi
The eddy viscosity is calculated by Eq. (2):
ν t = vvlμ

(2)

vvk
lε

(3)

the ε by Eq. (3):
ε=

and lμ, lε, and

vv
by Eqs. (4), (5) and (6) respectively.
k
(0.33 + 0.214 f lμ ) y
lμ =
*[1.53+ 0.12 f lμ ]
1 + 5.025 × 10 −4 yv
(1.3 + 7.5 f lε ) y
lε =
1 + 2.12 + 7.88 f lε / y v* + (0.028 + 0.0235 f lε ) y v*

(

)

⎡
⎛
⎞⎤
y *( 2− f vv / k )
vv
⎟⎟⎥
= 0.4⎢1 − exp⎜⎜ −
k
⎝ 4200(1 − 0.99 f vv / k ) ⎠⎦
⎣
where

f lμ = f l ε =

[

1
1 + tanh(50 * Ary − 4)
2

[

]

(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)

]

1
1 + tanh(120 * Ary − 4)
(8)
2
2) In the outer-wall region, where y*≥80, the standard k-ε model, Eqs. (9) and (10), are
used:
∂U j
ν ∂T
ν ∂k ⎞
∂U
∂ ⎛
Dk
⎜ (ν + t )
⎟ + νt ( i +
) − ε + gi β t
=
(9)
Prt ∂xi
σ k ∂xi ⎠
∂x j
∂xi
Dt ∂xi ⎝
f vv / k =

where σk =1.0. The ε solved by a transport equation
∂U j
ν ∂ε ⎞ ε ⎡
∂U
ν ∂T ⎤
Dε
∂ ⎛
⎜ (ν + t )
⎟ + ⎢C1ε ν t ( i +
=
) − C2 ε ε + C3ε gi β t
⎥
Prt ∂xi ⎥⎦
Dt ∂xi ⎝
σ ε ∂xi ⎠ k ⎢⎣
∂x j
∂xi

5

(10)

k2
, where Cμ = 0.09. The standard k-ε
The eddy viscosity is calculated by ν t = Cμ
ε
model does not need length scale prescription.

Simulation of Displacement Ventilation in a Room Using the TwoLayer Turbulence Model
The model used in this paper has been validated against many cases including:
natural convection and forced convection in simplified rooms, etc. (Xu 1998). In those
simple cases, the velocity and turbulence distributions are measured with anemometers
with high precision, such as Laser Doppler Anemometers. However, it is also necessary
to examine model performance in a scenario close to a real room, which a design
engineer most likely deals with. Altough it is difficult to use high precision anemometers
in a real room, a good model must be validated with data obtained from real rooms to
evaluate its performance. .
There are many kinds of mixed convection flows in a room. This investigation
selects displacement ventilation flow for the validation of the two-layer model.
Displacement ventilation has attracted much interest in recent years because of its
demonstrated capabilities to improve indoor air quality and reduce energy consumption
in buildings (Yuan et al. 1998 and Hu et al. 1999). Prediction of the airflow in a room
with displacement ventilation is more crucial than that with mixing ventilation because
the displacement ventilation generates stratified air temperature and contaminant
concentrations. The distributions of the air temperature and contaminant concentrations
are very important information needed by a designer of the HVAC system. The
experimental data of displacement ventilation from Yuan et al. (1999) have been used in
the current study to verify the performance of the two-layer model. The following section
describes the room airflow conditions with the displacement ventilation and computation
methods used.
Fig. 1 shows the experimental setup. The experimental rig simulates a 5.16m ×
3.65 m × 2.44m office occupied by two simulated persons and equipped with two tables,
two heated computers, two file cabinets and six overhead lights. A 3.65m×1.04m window
was mounted on the wall connecting the office room to an environmental chamber, where
the temperature was controlled to simulate outdoor conditions. All other walls were
insulated to minimize the heat gain/loss. The displacement ventilation system provided
air for the room from a diffuser that was situated on the opposite wall of the window. The
air was exhausted through the outlet at the ceiling. Internal heat flows were generated
from the computers, occupants and lights. The simulated pollutants, SF6 and CO2, were
discharged at occupants’ head level.
The prediction solved the three-dimensional equations for mass, momentum,
energy and concentration conservation on a non-uniform grid system: 52 × 48 × 28. This
grid appears to be sufficient according to the grid independence study performed in other
validation cases (Xu 1998). The boundary conditions and computation details are
summarized in Table 1. It should be noted that on the enclosure surfaces, we used the

6

measured wall temperatures as the boundary conditions, not empirical data used by Yuan
et al. (1999).
Fig. 2 shows that the observed and calculated airflow patterns in the mid-width
section via the displacement diffuser. Due to buoyancy, the cold air from the diffuser
spreads on the floor level and induced a reverse flow in the layer between 0.5 to 1m. In
addition, the hot window induced an upward flow close to it. Our prediction has precisely
reproduced all these patterns observed by the smoke-visualization. With the smoke
visualization technique, we can measure accurately the low velocity in the room through
image analysis.
Fig. 3 shows the temperature profiles at nine locations in the simulated office. The
agreement is very good in the region close to the ceiling. In the region close to the floor,
some discrepancies occur but the largest difference between the calculated temperatures
and measured ones is less than 1°C, about 4% of the measured temperature, which can be
considered as a good agreement. The numerical simulation conducted by Yuan et al.
(1999) used the RNG k-ε model with wall functions to predict the flow and heat transfer.
Since wall functions would predict grid dependent heat flux a prescribed convective heat
transfer coefficient was used to obtain the correct temperature distributions. The value of
the coefficient used in their study was calibrated by the experimental data. This is
undesirable in a numerical prediction because the coefficient is generally unknown. The
two-layer model does not require prescribing a convective heat transfer coefficient and
thus is more favorable for numerical simulations.
Fig. 4 compares the computed and the measured mean velocity profiles. The
agreement is acceptable. . The hot-wire anemometers used in the experiment cannot
measure accurately when the air velocity is lower than 0.1 to 0.15 m/s. Since the velocity
level in this case is low, the uncertainty in the measurements of the velocities is rather
high. The predicted velocities are still within the uncertainties of the experimental data.
Similarly, the turbulence quantities measured by the experiment has large
uncertainties as well. Therefore, the comparison between experimental data and
prediction is not very indicative but we still present it here anyway.. Fig. 5 shows the
computed fluctuatingvelocity deviates significant from the measured data for the
displacement ventilation. Chen (1995 and 1996) reported the same problems with other
k-ε models and Reynolds stress models. Nevertheless, the computation does predict the
trend of the flow turbulence in the room.
In another study (Xu 1998) where turbulence quantities were measured by a Laser
Doppler Anemometer, the agreement between the computed results and the measured
data is much better. This further confirms that the omni-directional hot sphere
anemometers have a poor accuracy in measuring the velocity fluctuations.
The investigation uses a tracer-gas (SF6) to simulate a contaminant gas, because
the background concentration of SF6 in atmosphere is very low. Fig. 6 shows the SF6
concentration profiles. The overall agreement between the computed results and
measured data is reasonably good but worse than that with other quantities. Yuan et al.
(1999) also found that the concentration prediction was difficult to match the
experimental data since it was very sensitive to the position and boundary conditions.

7

Nevertheless, the accuracy of the prediction in the lower part as well as the upper part of
the zones 4, 5, 6 and 9 is still acceptable.
This study shows that the computing cost with the two-layer model (52 × 48 × 28)
is slightly higher than that with the RNG k-ε model (48 × 42 × 24, Yuan et al. 1999), but
significantly lower than that would be required by a low-Reynolds-number k-ε modelA
low-Reynolds-number model would require at least a million grid cells and result in very
poor grid aspect ratios because there are many heated surfaces in the room and each
surface needs at least 20 grid cells to calculate heat transfercorrectly.The computing
effort would be tremendous and prohibitive for practical engineering design
This paper compares the computed results by the two-layer model with the
experimental data obtained in a real room. Since the data quality is not very high, it is
difficult to identify whether discrepancies are from the model or from the experiment.
However, Xu (1998) has used the two-layer model to predict two-dimensional flows with
high quality data, the performance of the two-layer model is much better.

Conclusions
This paper briefly reviews the effort to predict mixed convection with
computational fluid dynamics. With a two-layer turbulence model recently developed
from the data of direct numerical simulation and two-layer models for natural and forced
convection, it is possible to accurately predict mixed convection in a room.
Since displacement ventilation design requires accurate information of
airflow,This study used the two-layer model to predict the airflow pattern and
distributions of air temperature, air velocity, air velocity distributions, and contaminant
concentration simulated by a tracer gas in a room with displacement ventilation.
Designing such ventilation system often requires accurate information of airflow. The
model can predict accurately the airflow pattern, air velocity, and air temperature.
However, it is more difficult to predict the turbulence (velocity fluctuation) and
contaminant concentration.
The computing resources required by the simulation with the two-layer model is
slightly higher than that with the RNG k-ε model, but significantly lower than a lowReynolds number k-ε model.

Acknowledgements
This study is supported by the National Science Foundations through grant CMS9623864.

8

References
Aicher, T. and Martin, H. (1997) “New correlations for mixed turbulent natural and
forced convection heat transfer in vertical tubes,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer,
40(15), 3617-3626.
Blay, D., Mergui, S. and Niculae, C. (1992) “Confined turbulent mixed convection in the
presence of a horizontal buoyant wall jet,” Fundamentals of Mixed Convection,
HTD, 213, 65-72.
Chen, Q. (1995) “Comparison of different k-ε models for indoor air flow computations,”
Numerical Heat Transfer, Part B, 28, 353-369.
Chen, Q. (1996) “Prediction of Room Air Motion by Reynolds-Stress Models,” Building
and Environment, 31, 233-244.
Chen, T.S., Armaly, B.F. and Ali, M.M. (1987) “Turbulent mixed convection along a
vertical plate,” J. Heat Transfer, 109, 251-253.
Fedorov, G.A., Viskanta, R. and Mohamad, A.A. (1997) “Turbulent heat and mass
transfer in an asymmetrically heated vertical parallel-plate channel,” Int. J. Heat
and Fluid Flow, 18, 307-315.
Hu, S., Chen, Q. and Glicksman, L.R. (1999) “Comparison of energy consumption
between displacement and mixing ventilation systems for different U.S. buildings
and climates,” ASHRAE Transactions, 105(2).
Inagaki, T, and Komori, K. (1995) “Numerical modeling on turbulent transport with
combined forced and natural convection between two vertical parallel plates,”
Numerical Heat Transfer, Part A, 27, 417-431.
Jackson, J.D., Cotton, M.A., Yu, L.S.L. and Rouai, M.M. (1990) “Experimental and
computational studies of turbulent forced and mixed convection heat transfer to
water in a vertical pipe,” In Engineering Turbulence Modeling and Experiments
(Rodi W. and Ganic E.N. Editors), p809-818, Elsevier Science Publishing Co.,
Inc., New York.
Kasagi, N. and Nishimura, M. (1997) “Direct numerical simulation of combined forced
and natural convection in a vertical plane channel,” Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow,
18, 88-99.
Launder, B.E. and Spalding, D.B. (1974) “The numerical computation of turbulent
flows,” Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Energy, 3: 269-289.
Nakajima, M. and Fukui, K. (1980) “Buoyancy effects on turbulent transport in
combined free and forced convection between vertical parallel plates,” Int. J.
Heat Mass Transfer, 23(10), 1325-1336.
Nielsen, P.V., Restivo, A. and Whitelaw, J.H. (1979) “Buoyancy-affected flows in
ventilated rooms,” Numerical Heat Transfer, 2, 115-127.
Patel, K., Armaly, B.F. and Chen, T.S. (1996) “Transition from turbulent natural to
turbulent forced convection adjacent to an isothermal vertical plate,” HTD, 324,
51-56.

9

Rodi, W. (1991). “Experience with two-layer models combining the k-ε model with a
one-equation model near the wall,” AIAA-91-0216, 29th Aerospace Sciences
Meeting, Nevada.
Schwenke, H. (1975) “Ueber das Verhalten elener horizontaler Zuluftstrahlen im
begrenzten Raum,” Luft- und Kaltetechnik, 5, 241-246.
To W.M. and Humphrey, J.A.C. (1986) “Numerical simulation of turbulent buoyancy,
turbulent flow⎯I. Free convection along a heated, vertical, flat plate,” Int. J. Heat
Mass Transfer, 29, 573-592.
Van Driest E.R. (1956) “On turbulent flow near a wall,” Journal of the Aeronautical
Science, 23, 1007
Xu, W. (1998) “New turbulence models for indoor airflow simulation,” Ph.D. Thesis,
Department of Architecture, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
MA, USA.
Xu, W. and Chen, Q. (1998) “Numerical simulation of air flow in a room with
differentially heated vertical walls,” ASHRAE Transactions, 104(1), 168-175.Xu,
W., Chen, Q. and Nieuwstadt, F.T.M. (1998). “A new turbulence model for nearwall natural convection,” Int. J. Heat and Mass Transfer, 41, 3161-3176.
Yuan, X., Chen, Q. and Glicksman, L.R. (1998) “A critical review on displacement
ventilation,” ASHRAE Transactions, 104(1), 78-90.
Yuan, X., Chen, Q., Glicksman, L.R., Hu, Y. and X. Yang. (1999) “Measurements and
computations of room airflow with displacement ventilation,” ASHRAE
Transactions, 105(1), 340-352.

10

Table 1 Boundary conditions and computation details
P
U
V
W
T
B. C.1
-2
Uin
0
0
Tin
at inlet

B. C. 1
at outlet

0

k
3x10-2
U in2

∂U
∂V
∂W
∂T
∂k
=0
=0
=0
=0
=0
∂z
∂z
∂z
∂z
∂z

ε
0.09k in3 / 2
0.55lin
∂ε
=0
∂z

C
Cin
∂C
=0
∂z

3
-2
B. C. 1
0
0
0
0
Eq.
Constant flux for
at
(3)
human top surfaces,
Walls
otherwise no flux
FalseFalse-time-step
Relaxa- Linear False- False- False- False- Falsetime- time-step
timetimetimetimetion
step
step
step
step
step
method
Factor
0.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.5
0.001
0.001
0.1
1
Boundary Conditions.
2
No need to specify.
3
Fixed temperature for the enclosure surfaces, constant heat flux for the surfaces of the
computer, occupants and lights; no-flux condition for the other surfaces.

11

Fig. 1 Configuration of the simulated office.

12

(a) Observed

(b) Predicted
Fig. 2 The observed and predicted airflow pattern at the mid-width section via the
displacement diffuser.

13

