NASA/TM–2005-212841

Heat Transfer on a Flat Plate with Uniform and Step
Temperature Distributions
Parviz A. Bahrami

May 2005

The NASA STI Program Office . . . in Profile

Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to the
advancement of aeronautics and space science. The
NASA Scientific and Technical Information (STI)
Program Office plays a key part in helping NASA
maintain this important role.
The NASA STI Program Office is operated by
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for
NASA’s scientific and technical information. The
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
The Program Office is also NASA’s institutional
mechanism for disseminating the results of its
research and development activities. These results
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report
Series, which includes the following report types:
• TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of
completed research or a major significant phase
of research that present the results of NASA
programs and include extensive data or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations of significant
scientific and technical data and information
deemed to be of continuing reference value.
NASA’s counterpart of peer-reviewed formal
professional papers but has less stringent
limitations on manuscript length and extent
of graphic presentations.
• TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific and
technical findings that are preliminary or of
specialized interest, e.g., quick release reports,
working papers, and bibliographies that contain
minimal annotation. Does not contain extensive
analysis.
• CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
technical findings by NASA-sponsored
contractors and grantees.

• CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
papers from scientific and technical conferences, symposia, seminars, or other meetings
sponsored or cosponsored by NASA.
• SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific, technical,
or historical information from NASA programs,
projects, and missions, often concerned with
subjects having substantial public interest.
• TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. Englishlanguage translations of foreign scientific and
technical material pertinent to NASA’s mission.
Specialized services that complement the STI
Program Office’s diverse offerings include creating
custom thesauri, building customized databases,
organizing and publishing research results . . . even
providing videos.
For more information about the NASA STI
Program Office, see the following:
• Access the NASA STI Program Home Page at
http://www.sti.nasa.gov
• E-mail your question via the Internet to
help@sti.nasa.gov
• Fax your question to the NASA Access Help
Desk at (301) 621-0134
• Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at
(301) 621-0390
• Write to:
NASA Access Help Desk
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076-1320

NASA/TM–2005-212841

Heat Transfer on a Flat Plate with Uniform and Step
Temperature Distributions
Parviz A. Bahrami
Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California

National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, California 94035-1000

May 2005

Available from:
NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076-1320
(301) 621-0390

National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22161
(703) 487-4650

Table of Contents
Nomenclature.............................................................................................................................................iv
Abstract.....................................................................................................................................................1
Introduction................................................................................................................................................1
Non-Uniform Surface Temperature Correlation..................................................................................................2
Geometry and Flow Description .....................................................................................................................2
GASP Code and Turbulent Models..................................................................................................................3
Description of Grid ......................................................................................................................................3
Results and Discussion.................................................................................................................................4
Concluding Remarks....................................................................................................................................5
References..................................................................................................................................................6
Figures .....................................................................................................................................................7

iii

Nomenclature
Cp∞

specific heat of free stream

uτ

friction velocity, (τw / ρw ) 0.5

K

turbulent kinetic energy

U∞

free-stream velocity

k∞

thermal conductivity of free stream

x

kt

turbulent thermal conductivity

stream-wise distance from the plate
leading edge

l

overall length of the plate

xo

length of uncooled section

Ma

free-stream Mach number

y

distance perpendicular to the plate

Pr

Prandtl number, (Pr = Cp∞ µ∞ / k∞ )

y+

wall-related Reynolds number,
(ρw uτ y / µw)

Prt

turbulent Prandtl number,
(Prt = Cp∞ µt / kt )

ε

absolute rate of turbulent dissipation

q

heat flux

ω

Re

Reynolds number, (Re= ρ∞ U∞ x / µ∞ )

specific rate of turbulent dissipation,
(ε/K )

µ∞

dynamic viscosity

St

Stanton number,
(St = q / Cp∞ ρ∞ U∞ ∆T)

µt

turbulent dynamic viscosity

T∞

temperature of free stream

ρw

density at the wall

To

stagnation temperature of free stream

ρ∞

free-stream density

Tw

wall temperature

τw

wall shear

Tr

recovery temperature

∆T

free-stream to wall temperature
difference, (T∞ - Tw )

iv

Heat Transfer on a Flat Plate With Uniform and Step
Temperature Distributions
PARVIZ A. BAHRAMI
Ames Research Center

Abstract
Heat transfer associated with turbulent flow on a stepheated or cooled section of a flat plate at zero angle of
attack with an insulated starting section was computationally modeled using the GASP Navier-Stokes code.
The algebraic eddy viscosity model of Baldwin-Lomax and
the turbulent two-equation models, the K-ω model and the
Shear Stress Turbulent model (SST), were employed. The
variations from uniformity of the imposed experimental
temperature profile were incorporated in the computations.
The computations yielded satisfactory agreement with the
experimental results for all three models. The BaldwinLomax model showed the closest agreement in heat
transfer, whereas the SST model was higher and the K-ω
model was yet higher than the experiments. In addition to
the step temperature distribution case, computations were
also carried out for a uniformly heated or cooled plate. The
SST model showed the closest agreement with the Von
Karman analogy, whereas the K-ω model was higher and
the Baldwin-Lomax was lower.

Introduction
Computational fluid dynamics and heat transfer (CFDHT)
as an effective design tool for aerospace vehicles and
systems has lead to widespread utilization of and reliance
on computer solutions in place of laboratory and flight
tests. When studying complex phenomena, laboratory
experimentation, apparatus, and instrumentation may also
be substituted by judicious use of computer experimentation by numerically modeling representative cases.
Clearly, an integral and crucial element of CFDHT as a
design tool for accurate simulations of flow field and heat
transfer is turbulence modeling. CFDHT can be applied
with confidence to a wide range of problems, provided its
ability to produce accurate solutions to the actual
problems under investigation is assessed. This assessment
is generally referred to as experimental validation, which
constitutes an impetus for the present research.

Validation of a CFDHT code is not a trivial task. It is
highly desirable to employ laboratory experimental results
for validation and calibration of CFDHT codes. The
picture that emerges from consideration of various
experimental and computational studies indicates that the
differences in definitions of Stanton number and the heat
transfer coefficient, as well as experimental and computational factors, require careful consideration to enable
precise comparisons. Furthermore, to assess the accuracy
of the computational results likely obtainable for a
particular problem under investigation, one should also
compare the results obtained with selected turbulence
models for related geometry with available experimental
data.
In an important class of problems, non-uniform surfaces
are encountered in design of modern aerothermodynamic
vehicles owing to, for example, material discontinuities or
variations in surface emissivities. The situation may be
analogous with jumps in surface catalytic efficiency,
which accompany sudden surges in heat transfer. Computation by point-wise temperature specification for these
important aerothermal applications may be necessary, for
example, for cooled wall sections or situations where
abrupt changes in the thermal conductivity of the wall
material is encountered due to structural or manufacturing
considerations.
The present work is concerned with determination of heat
transfer through turbulent flow on heated or cooled regions
of a vehicle’s surface with step-wise wall temperature
distribution and comparison with the experimental results
reported in the open literature. In addition to the aforementioned important applications, a wide range of other
applications can be associated with this study, for
example, for application to hot spots, or when local
cooling of portions of a vehicle may be needed because
they are subjected to high or non-uniform temperature and
the material limitations of the thermal protection material
or the structure may necessitate temperature control.
Thermal control can be employed by external means, for
example, transpiration or film cooling, or with internal
conductive or convective heat transfer. Transpiration and

1

film cooling, whereby fluid at a lower temperature than
the surface is added to the boundary layer, are effective
means of temperature control. A desirable feature of film
cooling is that the cooling actually extends some distance
downstream of the opening. The opening may, therefore,
be placed where the structure allows it and away from such
things as optical windows. In other applications it may be
desirable to avoid employing openings in the vehicle
walls for the purposes of film or transpiration cooling,
while producing some of their salient features. In these
cases portions of the wall may be held at specified
temperatures. Internal cooling can be achieved in instances
where the thermal conductivity of the wall material is
sufficiently high to allow heat transfer to the interior
region and removal by internal means.
To assess the accuracy of the computations, the results are
compared to available experimental data. Moretti and Kays
(1965) reported heat transfer data for a step distribution in
wall temperature (ref. 2). A more recent study by Orlando,
Moffat, and Kays (1974) is concerned with step wall
temperature distribution, but is limited to a strong adverse
pressure gradient (ref. 3). Taylor, Love, Coleman, and
Hosni (1990) presented experimental and computational
data for incompressible turbulent flow of air with an
unheated starting length followed by a constant wall heat
flux length (ref. 4). The experimental data of Moretti and
Kays (1965) was used in the present study to assess the
validity and accuracy of the present computations when
applied to variable wall temperature flow (ref. 2).

St = 0.0296 Re -0.2 (Pr Tw / T∞ ) -0.4

(1)

Heat transfer rates and temperature profiles for flow over a
flat plate with a stepwise temperature distribution were
reported by Reynolds, Kays, and Klein (1958) (ref. 6). An
integral analysis was conducted that allowed calculation of
heat transfer from a flat plate with a step wall temperature
distribution. The analysis was in agreement with all
available data. The data were used in a differential analysis
that allowed prediction of the temperature profiles. Other
analyses of varying wall temperature are reported by
Reynolds, Kays, and Klein (1958) and Kays, W. M., and
M. E. Crawford (1980) (refs. 7, 9).
Experimental results of Moretti and Kays (1965) and
Moretti’s Ph. D. dissertation (1965) are of considerable
interest to this study (refs. 2, 10). They extend the results
of Reynolds, Kays, and Klein (1958) (refs. 5–8). The
results agreed with the momentum integral method of
Ambrok (1957) (ref. 11). The bulk of Moretti and Kays
(1965) (ref. 2) experiments pertain to flow conditions with
various rates of free-stream acceleration, but include an
important step wall temperature distribution case with
uniform free-stream conditions (ref. 2). The other reported
cases are incompressible constant-density flows and
include variations of longitudinal wall temperature and
pressure distributions with non-zero rates of free-stream
acceleration.

Geometry and Flow Description
Non-Uniform Surface Temperature
Correlation
Wall temperature is often variable in practical
applications, while analyses are often carried out for
constant wall temperature conditions. A considerable
amount of work has been reported on heat transfer in
turbulent boundary layers, but few heat transfer
measurements have been reported that investigate heat
transfer with imposed variable wall temperature. A
comprehensive study of the turbulent flow over a flat plate
conducted by Reynolds, Kays, and Klein (1958) was
published in four reports (refs. 5–8). Heat transfer rates,
velocity profiles, and temperature profiles for turbulent
incompressible flow of air over a flat plate with a constant
surface temperature were measured and reported by
Reynolds, Kays, and Klein (1958) (ref. 5). The turbulent
heat transfer measurements agreed well with their power
representation of the Von Karman analogy for turbulent
incompressible flow of air.

2

Flat plate geometry is fundamental to fluid dynamics, but
more importantly, heat transfer from a flat plate with a
step temperature distribution may provide the basis for
analysis of complex wall temperature distribution
problems by employment of superposition. For the
present study, a flat plate geometry with the unheated
starting length and non-uniform surface heat flux
conditions was selected. Experimental data in the open
literature appear to be limited to the experiments of
Moretti and Kays (1965) (ref. 2), extending the results of
Reynolds, Kays, and Klein (1958) (refs. 2, 6). They
pertain to step wall temperature distributions of
incompressible turbulent flow over a flat plate without
pressure gradient. In the present computations, the flow
conditions were chosen to correspond to the conditions
attained in the laboratory wind tunnel experiments of
Moretti and Kays (1965) (ref. 2). The flow was uniform
and parallel to the plate in the free stream, and the
boundary layer was tripped and fully turbulent.

A schematic diagram of the physical problem under study
is presented in figure 1. The sketch is a cross-sectional
view of the configuration. As seen therein, the cooled
region, enclosed by dashed lines, started at a distance xo
from the leading edge of the plate and continued in the
flow direction through the rest of the plate length.
Figure 1 also contains the dimensional nomenclature, as
well as the x, y coordinates used to identify the position
on the computational domain. Although the actual
dimensions in the computational domain will be indicated
shortly, it is relevant to note that the results have more
general applicability when they are expressed in terms of
dimensionless quantities. The dimensionless quantities,
which govern the heat transfer results, may be written as
Stanton number, St, and Reynolds number, Re.
St = q / Cp∞ ρ∞ U∞ ∆T

(2)

Re = ρ∞ U∞ x / µ∞

(3)

The present computations are for flow of air with the freestream velocity, U∞ = 19.39 m/s, free-stream temperature,
T∞ = 309.4 K, and free-stream density, ρ∞ = 1.185 kg/m3.
The laminar and turbulent Prandtl numbers are Pr = 0.72
and Prt = 0.9, respectively. The starting length of the
plate, leading edge to xo = 0.61 m, is insulated, whereas
the rest of the length encounters spatially non-uniform
heat flux conditions. The overall length dimension l of
the plate is 1.83 m.

GASP Code and Turbulent Models
GASP, a commercially available finite-volume NavierStokes code, served as the means of computation. GASP
is a fluid dynamics and heat transfer computational code
that solves the integral form of time-dependent Reynolds
Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations in three dimensions, employing the user-specified initial and boundary
conditions. The code is fully conservative and shock
capturing. The primitive variables, density, Cartesian
velocity components, pressure, and temperature are stored
throughout the code. A number of physical and thermodynamic models, as well as curve fits for transport properties, are selectable. In the present computations, a pointwise specification of the wall temperature was employed
in the viscous no-slip boundary, and the Sutherland
empirical formula for molecular viscosity was used.
For the present research the algebraic or zero-equation
turbulence model of Baldwin-Lomax (1978) (ref. 12), the
turbulent two-equation models, K-ω model of Wilcox

(1991) (ref. 13) and Shear Stress Turbulent model (SST)
of Menter (1991) (ref. 14), were employed. All three
models are eddy viscosity models. The zero-equation
Baldwin-Lomax model is well adapted to attached flows,
where a single well-defined layer can be identified. For
more complex flows in which it may be difficult to define
the velocity and length scales, the more advanced turbulence two-equation K-ω model has been developed. The
two-equation K-ω model is one of several two-equation
eddy viscosity models available.
Although a detailed discussion of these models is beyond
the scope of this paper, since the equations in the K-ω
model are less stiff than the K-ε model near the wall and a
damping function is not required in the viscous sublayer,
the K-ω model was employed in the present research as an
alternative to the algebraic turbulent eddy viscosity model
of Baldwin-Lomax. The SST two-equation model was also
used. It combines the K-ω and K-ε models and extracts
some of the mixed derivatives, which allows determination of the specific rate of turbulence dissipation, ω, in
the region between the wall and the boundary layer edge.
The model constants, values used in Menter (1991)
(ref 14.), were employed for all computations.
The GASP code uses a finite-volume spatial discretization
method. The computational grid can be structured so that
the state variables are stored at the centers of each control
volume. GASP solves for the control volume averages
and interpolates the solution to the boundaries. The wall
temperature boundary condition values are specified at the
internal control volume wall face center.

Description of Grid
For the present solutions, a grid containing 8000 points
was created that resolved the viscous and thermal
phenomena associated with this problem. There were 100
grid points in the stream-wise direction and 80 points in
the normal direction to the free-stream direction. A simple
stretching scheme was employed, which increased the
spacing of the grid points with the distance from the wall
in a fashion resembling a geometric series. As a guide,
calculations were made to evaluate y+, which in essence is
a wall-related Reynolds number. The first grid point was
set to correspond to a y+ value of order unity or smaller
than unity. By adjusting the values of the constants in the
stretching functions, the grid could further be compressed
near the wall. The resulting grid was more compressed in
the y direction normal to the plate. It provided uniform,
but relatively fine, spacing in the general flow direction,

3

x. This is a natural choice, since the flow is boundary
layer in nature and strong gradients are generally expected
to exist in the y direction. In the tangential direction, with
the exception of the plate tip and near the step heat flux or
temperature boundary condition, more gradual gradients are
expected. Computational results for all flow quantities
and heat transfer obtained were insensitive to the grid
refinement.

Results and Discussion
The experimental heat transfer results of Moretti and Kays
(1965) (ref. 2) for an approximate step function wall
temperature distribution and non-accelerating flow conditions provided a unique opportunity for a substantive
comparison with the present computations. Most of the
pertinent data collected during experimentation was
reported in Moretti (1965) (ref. 10). In their experiments,
the starting length of the plate was insulated, whereas
electrical currents to strip heaters further downstream were
adjusted to achieve a pre-selected and relatively uniform
temperature jump. In order to assess the accuracy of the
present computations, the experimental conditions were
computationally modeled in the present study. The actual
experimental free-stream and surface temperature data were
employed as boundary conditions in the GASP code.
When the free-stream values for the three components of
velocity, the air temperature, and density were set
according to the experimental values stated earlier, the
resulting Mach number was Ma = 0.055 and the unit
Reynolds number was Re/x = 1,215,400 m–1.
In order to discuss the variations of the wall temperature
in Moretti (1965), the wall temperature data have been
recast in the SI units and plotted as a function of the
Reynolds number, Re, in figure 2 (ref. 8). The symbols
are the measured data, and the Reynolds number is based
on the length of the plate from the leading edge, using the
free-stream conditions. A line is passed through the data
points for clarity. Although the experiments were planned
and carried out with care, some non-uniformity in the wall
temperatures could not be avoided, due to experimental
difficulties in completely insulating the starting section of
the plate. There also existed a small, but non-zero, temperature difference between the starting section of the plate
and the free stream. The temperature of this uncooled
section of the plate was 2 K cooler than the free stream
and somewhat non-uniform. The cooled section was also
somewhat non-uniform in temperature, with the mean
variations of order 2 K. Furthermore, as may be expected,
nature provided a continuously varying temperature profile

4

in the region between the cooled and uncooled sections,
rather than a sharp discontinuity. The overall uncertainties
in measurement of temperature, heat flux, and velocity in
the cooled section were estimated to be approximately 3%,
2%, and 1%, respectively.
From the foregoing discussion it should be clear that the
conditions in the laboratory experiments deviated somewhat from the ideal: an adiabatic and uniform temperature
starting section and a sharp step function temperature
imposed in the non-adiabatic section. In order to model
this experiment accurately, it was useful to incorporate the
temperature profile of the entire length of the plate,
especially since the temperature differences between the
cooled section of the plate and the free stream, ∆T, were
relatively small. This reduced the possibility that not
accounting for the small temperature anomalies might
affect the temperature history of the thermal boundary
layer and alter the local heat flux in comparison to the
ideal case. The point-wise plate temperature profile was
entered into the GASP input file and the computations
were initiated. The convergence criteria were set at 10-6 for
successive values of all variables. The velocity and
temperature fields converged in less than 4000 iterations
and remained unchanged when the number of iterations
were doubled. The laminar sub-layer was well defined and
the velocity and temperature profiles were linear in the
inner wall region.
As mentioned earlier, the dimensionless quantities, which
govern the heat transfer results, were chosen as Stanton
number, St, and Reynolds number, Re. While the code
determines the values of the physical properties for each
control volume, the use of free-stream values in calculation of the Reynolds and Stanton numbers is preferred,
since end users are more likely to possess the free-stream
data. Use of the free-stream values in calculation of the
dimensionless parameters also reduces the confusion often
associated with the variations in reference temperature
concept when employing CFDHT results.
Before discussing the step temperature results, it is useful
to examine the computational results that were obtained
for the same conditions employed above, but with
uniform wall temperature distribution on the entire plate.
The results of these computations are shown in figure 3
together with the curve of Reynolds, Kays, and Klein
(1958) for the Von Karman analogy for comparison
(ref. 5). As shown therein, the Shear Stress Turbulent
two-equation model demonstrated the closest agreement
with the Von Karman analogy, while the turbulent twoequation K-ω model was higher and the algebraic eddy
viscosity model of Baldwin-Lomax was lower. Although a
satisfactory level of agreement is evident for both

Baldwin-Lomax and the K-ω turbulent models, deviations
of approximately 10 percent were present.
The results of the computations for the step temperature
profile are shown in figure 4 together with the experimental data of Moretti and Kays (1965) (ref. 2). The
experimental data are shown by circle symbols. It should
be noted that, since Stanton number contains the ratio of
the heat flux to the temperature difference, for small
values of heat flux as a result of small temperature
differences, small errors including neglecting the radiation
effects, extraneous heat losses, and variations in physical
properties, can alter its value markedly. This is indeed the
case for the adiabatic section of the plate. For this reason
only the Stanton number values for the heated or cooled
section of the plate have significance, especially when
comparisons between experiments and computations are
made.
As evident in figure 4, the algebraic eddy viscosity model
of Baldwin-Lomax showed close agreement with the
experiments, while the two-equation Shear Stress
Turbulent model was higher and the K-ω was still higher.
As with the uniform wall temperature distribution case, a
similar trend of agreement is evident between the three
models. The agreement of the SST model results are
within approximately 10 percent, while the K-ω model
results are within approximately 15 percent of the experimental data. As mentioned earlier, a detailed discussion of
turbulent modeling is beyond the scope of the present
report. However, it should be pointed out that the turbulent thermal conductivity, kt, is extracted from the
definition of the turbulent Prandtl number,

corresponding to the Reynolds number at the start of the
cooled section. Figure 5 indicates that there is a remarkable level of agreement between each pair of curves,
corresponding to each turbulent model far downstream
from the step in wall temperature or the plate leading
edge. This result indicates the diminishing influence of the
early momentum boundary layer on the far downstream
region. The heat transfer close to the leading edge and for
some distance downstream from the leading edge, however, is higher due to the thinner momentum boundary
layer of the uniform wall temperature case. One may, for
first approximation purposes, reasonably (within 20
percent) estimate the heat transfer in the cooled section of
the step wall temperature problem by employing the
results from the uniform wall temperature case.
It should be noted that for the present conditions, the
radiation effects had introduced only minor errors due to
the relatively low temperatures employed in the experiments. The uncertainty in measurement of temperature,
heat flux, and velocity in the cooled section were estimated by Moretti and Kays (ref. 2) to be approximately
3%, 2%, and 1%, respectively. This appears to have
caused only minor errors. The stagnation temperature of
the free stream, To, and the recovery temperature, Tr , were
very close in value to the free-stream temperature, T∞. The
differences in definitions of Stanton number and the heat
transfer coefficient, often encountered when attempting to
compare reported experimental and computational results
due to varied employment of Tr and To, did not come into
play in the present investigations.

Concluding Remarks
Prt = Cp ∞ µ t / kt

(4)

and applied in the Boussinesq approximation of the
turbulent heat transfer. The three models predict the heat
transfer somewhat differently, not only because of the
differences in the convective velocity, but also because of
the implicit dependence of kt on µt.
Inspection of figures 3 and 4 further reveals that the
shapes of the curves for the heated or cooled section of the
step temperature case resemble those for the uniform wall
temperature case. This suggests that the results of the
uniform wall temperature case may be applicable to the
step wall temperature case, if the values of Reynolds
number were shifted by the value at the start of the heated
or cooled section. To investigate this possibility, the data
of figures 3 and 4 are superimposed in figure 5, but the
values of Reynolds number for the uniform wall temperature case were uniformly increased by 740,910, the value

Heat transfer on a flat plate with uniform and step temperature distribution was successfully modeled. The pointwise wall temperature specification feature of the GASP
code was employed to obtain the computational results.
Employment of the algebraic eddy viscosity model of
Baldwin-Lomax and the turbulent two-equation models,
the K-ω model and the Shear Stress Turbulent model, for
the local heat transfer on the plate with step temperature
distribution resulted in solutions in agreement with the
experiments of Moretti and Kays (1965) within 15 percent
(ref. 2). The computational results obtained for uniform
plate temperature were within 10 percent of the Von
Karman analogy. For the present investigation, the full
three-dimensional Navier-Stokes form was utilized, where
primitive variables were density, Cartesian velocity
components, pressure, and temperature. These agreements
lend support to the applicability of the code and its

5

implementation of the turbulence models as a tool for
engineering design application, as well as for computer
experimentation in studying related problems with nonuniform wall temperature. It was shown that, for
engineering design purposes, one could estimate the heat
transfer to the cooled section of the step wall temperature
problem by employing the results of the uniform wall
temperature case if the magnitude of the temperature
difference applied is relatively small.

References
1. AeroSoft, Inc.: GASP User's Manual, version 3,
1996.
2. Moretti, P. M.; and Kays, W. M.: Heat Transfer to a
Turbulent Boundary Layer with Varying Freestream Velocity and Varying Surface Temperature
-- an Experimental Study. Int. J. Heat and Mass
Transfer, vol. 8, 1965, pp. 1187–1202.
3. Orlando, A. F.; Moffat, R. J.; and Kays, W. M.:
Turbulent Transport of Heat and Momentum in a
Boundary Layer Subject to Deceleration, Suction
and Variable Wall Temperature. NASA CR139655, 1974.
4. Taylor, R. P.; Love, P. H.; Coleman, H. W.; and
Hosni, M. H.: Step Heat Flux Effects on
Turbulent Boundary Layer Heat Transfer. J. of
Thermophysics and Heat Transfer, vol. 4, Jan.
1990, pp. 121–123.
5. Reynolds, W. C.; Kays, W. M.; and Klein, S. J.:
Heat Transfer in the Turbulent Incompressible
Boundary Layer: I - Constant Wall Temperature.
NASA Mem. 12-1-58W, 1958a.
6. Reynolds, W. C.; Kays, W. M.; and Klein, S. J.:
Heat Transfer in the Turbulent Incompressible
Boundary Layer: II - Step Wall Temperature
Distribution. NASA Mem. 12-2-58W, 1958b.

6

7.

Reynolds, W. C.; Kays, W. M.; and Klein, S. J.:
Heat Transfer in the Turbulent Incompressible
Boundary Layer: III - Arbitrary Wall Temperature
and Heat Flux. NASA Mem. 12-3-58W, 1958c.
8. Reynolds, W. C.; Kays, W. M.; and Klein, S. J.:
Heat Transfer in the Turbulent Incompressible
Boundary Layer: IV - Effects of Location of
Transition and Prediction of Heat Transfer in a
Known Transition Region. NASA Mem. 12-458W, 1958d.
9. Kays, W. M.; and Crawford, M. E.: Convective Heat
and Mass Transfer. McGraw-Hill, New York,
N. Y., 1980.
10. Moretti, P. M.: Ph. D. Dissertation, Dept. of
Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University,
1965.
11. Ambrok, G. S.: The Effects of Surface Temperature
Variability on Heat Exchange in a Laminar Flow
in a Boundary Layer. Sov. Fiz-Tech. Fiz., vol. 2,
1957, p. 1979.
12. Baldwin, B. S.; and Lomax, H.: Thin Layer
Approximation and Algebraic Model for
Separated Turbulent Flows. AIAA Paper 78-257,
16th Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Huntsville,
AL, Jan. 1978.
13. Wilcox, D. C.: A Half Century Historical Review of
the K-ω Model. AIAA Paper 91-0615, 29th
Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Reno, NV, Jan.
1991.
14. Menter, F. R.: Performance of Popular Turbulence
Model for Attached and Separated Adverse
Pressure Gradient Flows. AIAA Paper 91-1784,
22nd Fuid Dynamics, Plasma Dynamics and
Lasers Conference, Honolulu, HI, June 1991.

y
U∞

ρ∞
∆T

T∞

X
x0

l

q=0
q = q(x)
Figure 1. Flat plate with step wall temperature distribution.

14

Temperature difference, K

12

10

8

6

Experiment, Moretti

4

2

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Reynolds number, Re x 10 E – 6
Figure 2. Distribution of the free stream to wall temperature difference.

7

4.5

4.0
Baldwin-Lomax
k–ω
SST
von Karman analogy

St x 10 E3

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0
0.0

0.5

1.5

1.0

2.0

2.5

Re x 10E – 6

Figure 3. Comparison of the heat-transfer results for uniform wall temperature with the Von Karman analogy.

4.5

4.0
Experiment, Moretti
Baldwin-Lomax
k–ω
SST

St x 10E3

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0
0.0

0.5

1.5

1.0

2.0

Re x 10 E – 6
Figure 4. Comparison of the heat-transfer results for step wall temperature with the experiments.

8

2.5

4.5

4.0
Experiment, Moretti
Baldwin-Lomax, shifted
K – ω, shifted
SST, shifted
von Karman analogy, shifted

St x 10E3

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Re x 10 E – 6
Figure 5. Comparison of the heat-transfer results for step and uniform wall temperature, when the plates are shifted.

9

Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing
data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or
any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Department of Defense, Washington Headquarters Services,
Directorate for information Operations and Reports (0704-0188), 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA 22202-4302. Respondents should be aware
that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a
currently valid OMB control number.

PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY)

16-05-2005

3. DATES COVERED (From - To)

2. REPORT TYPE

Technical Memorandum

4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER

Heat Transfer on a Flat Plate with Uniform and Step Temperature
Distributions

5b. GRANT NUMBER

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER

5d. PROJECT NUMBER

6. AUTHOR(S)

Parviz A. Bahrami
5e. TASK NUMBER

5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

376-70
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
REPORT NUMBER

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000

A-0513611

10. SPONSORING/MONITOR’S ACRONYM(S)

9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)

NASA

National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC 20546-0001

11. SPONSORING/MONITORING
REPORT NUMBER

NASA/TM-2005-212841
12. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Unclassified — Unlimited
Distribution: Nonstandard
Subject Category 05, 34
Availability: NASA CASI (301) 621-0390
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES

Point of Contact: Parviz A. Bahrami, Ames Research Center, MS 230-1, Moffett Field, CA 94035-1000
(650) 604-3429
14. ABSTRACT

Heat transfer associated with turbulent flow on a step-heated or cooled section of a flat plate at zero angle of attack with an
insulated starting section was computationally modeled using the GASP Navier-Stokes code. The algebraic eddy viscosity
model of Baldwin-Lomax and the turbulent two-equation models, the K-ω model and the Shear Stress Turbulent model (SST),
were employed. The variations from uniformity of the imposed experimental temperature profile were incorporated in the
computations. The computations yielded satisfactory agreement with the experimental results for all three models. The BaldwinLomax model showed the closest agreement in heat transfer, whereas the SST model was higher and the K-ω model was yet
higher than the experiments. In addition to the step temperature distribution case, computations were also carried out for a
uniformly heated or cooled plate. The SST model showed the closest agreement with the Von Karman analogy, whereas the
K-ω model was higher and the Baldwin-Lomax was lower.
15. SUBJECT TERMS

Turbulent flow, Heat transfer, Experimental fluid dynamics, Turbulence modeling

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:
a. REPORT

17. LIMITATION OF
ABSTRACT

b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGE

Unclassified Unclassified Unclassified

Unclassified

18. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON
OF
Parviz A. Bahrami
PAGES

14

19b. TELEPHONE (Include area code)

(650) 604-3429
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 8-98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18

