                           Final Technical Report

Project Title:                Recovery Act: A Measurement – Management
                              Technology for Improving Energy Efficiency in Data
                              Centers and Telecommunication Facilities

Award Number:                 DE-EE0002897

Project Period:               01/31/2010 – 03/31/2012



Technical Contact:            PI: Hendrik Hamann, 914-945-2430,
                              hendrikh@us.ibm.com,

Technical Contact:            Levente Klein, 914-945-3698
                              IBM TJ Watson Research Center,
                              kleinl@us.ibm.com

Business Contact:             Same as Technical Contact

DOE Project Officer:          Debo Aichbhaumik, 720-356-1423,
                              debo.aichbhaumik@go.doe.gov
DOE Project Monitor:          Chad Sapp, 720-356-1302,
                              chad.sapp@go.doe.gov
DOE HQ Contact:               Bob Gemmer, 202-586-5885,
                              Bob.gemmer@ee.doe.gov
DOE Contract Specialist:      Christina Kouch, 720-356-1674,
                              christina.kouch@go.doe.gov

Recipient Organization:       IBM TJ Watson Research Center
                              1101 Kitchawan Road
                              Yorktown Heights, NY 10598

Date of Report:               06/28/2012




                                                                                   1
Acknowledgement: This report is based upon work supported by the US
Department of Energy under Award No DE-EE0002897

Disclaimer: ”Any findings, opinion, and conclusion or recommendation expressed
in this report are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflects the views
of the Department of Energy”




Document Availability: Reports are freely available via the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) Information Bridge Website: http://www.osti.gov/bridge

Reports are available to DOE employees, DOE contractors, Energy Technology Data
Exchange (ETDE) representatives, and Informational Nuclear Information System (INIS)
representatives from the following source:

       Office of Scientific and Technical Information
       P.O. Box 62
       Oak Ridge, TN 37831
       Tel: (865) 576-8401
       FAX: (865) 576-5728
       E-mail: reports@osti.gov
       Website: http://www.osti.gov/contract.html



                                                                                        2
Table of Content

List of Acronyms……………………………………………………………………………….4
List of Figures……....…………………..…………………………………………………….5
List of Tables…………………………………….……………………………………………...5
Summary………………………………………...……………………………………………….6
Introduction……………...……………………………………………………………………...7
Background……………….……………………………………………………………………..8

Results…………………………..……………………………………………………………….9

1. MMT Technology Development…..…………………………………………………...10
     1.1 Corrosion Sensors………………..………………………………...…………..10
     1.2 Power Sensors……………………….…..……………………………..………..13

2. MMT Modeling Technologies…………………………………………………………….14
       2.1 Computational Fluid Dynamics modeling………….....………………………..14
       2.2 Statistical Thermal Zone Mapping……………………...………………….…...15
       2.3 A Spatio-Temporal Prediction Model………………………………………….17
3. Software development……..……………………………………………………….…….17
4. Commercialization……………………………..……………………………………..……18
5. Benefit assessment………………………………………………………………………..19

6. Accomplishments……………………………….….………………………………….20
      6.1 Publications and Presentations…………………………………………………20
      6.2 Patents and Disclosures…………..…………………………………………….22

Conclusions………….………………………………………………………………………...23
Appendix A…………….......…………………………………………………………………..24
References…………………………………………………………………………………..…27




                                                                     3
List of Acronyms
Å        Angstrom
AC       Alternating Current
ACU      Air Conditioning Unit
ASHRAE   American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning
         Engineers
CCB      Collection Computer Board
CDU      Cooling Distribution Unit
CFD      Computational Fluid Dynamics
CRAC     Computer Room Air Conditioning
DC       Data Center
DCIE     Data Center Infrastructure Efficiency
IT       Information Technology
LBNL     Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory
MMT      Measurement and Management Technology
PDE      Partial Differential Equation
PCB      Printed Circuit Board
SPB      Signal Processing Board
TF       Telecom Facility
VHO      Video Hub Office




                                                                           4
List of Figures
Fig 1 Wireless sensing layout at a telecom facility……….……………………………….10
Fig 2 Silver corrosion sensor………………………………………………………………….11
Fig 3 Indoor corrosion rate…………………………………………………………………….12
Fig 4 Corrosion rate in an air side economized data center …………………………….12
Fig 5 Power sensors hardware and electronics……………………………………………..13
Fig 6 Power sensor mounting………………………………………………………………...14
Fig 7 Simulations of the cooling zones……………………………………………………….15
Fig 8 S-curve pattern for the vertical temperature profiles…………………………………15
Fig 9 Statistical temperature fitting…………………………………………………………..16
Fig 10 Thermal zones in a video hub office….………………………………………………16
Fig 11 Temperature distribution prediction….……………………………………………….17
Fig 12 MMT interface for CFD simulation….……………………………………………….18
Fig 13 Optimization of workload placement....………………………………………………19
Fig 14 Thermal scan of the Poughkeepsie data center………………………….…………24
Fig 15 Thermal map of the data center after energy optimization ……………….……….25
Fig 16 Total energy, IT consumed energy, and DCIE……………………….………….….26




List of Tables
Table 1 Energy savings achieved at 3 test sites……..…………………………….……….9
Table 2 Achievable savings using MMT for energy efficiency auditing ………………….19
Table 3 Economical benefit of adoption of MMT projected until 2035 ...…………………20
Table 4 Comparison of the power measurements before and after MMT optimization...23




                                                                                 5
                                    Summary

        Data center (DC) electricity use is increasing at an annual rate of over 20% and
presents a concern for the Information Technology (IT) industry, governments, and the
society [1,2]. A large fraction of the energy use is consumed by the compressor cooling
to maintain the recommended operating conditions for IT equipment [1]. The most
common way to improve the DC efficiency is achieved by optimally provisioning the
cooling power to match the global heat dissipation in the DC. However, at a more
granular level, the large range of heat densities of today’s IT equipment makes the task
of provisioning cooling power optimized to the level of individual computer room air
conditioning (CRAC) units much more challenging. Distributed sensing within a DC
enables the development of new strategies to improve energy efficiency, such as hot
spot elimination through targeted cooling, matching power consumption at rack level with
workload schedule, and minimizing power losses. The scope of Measurement and
Management Technologies (MMT) is to develop a software tool and the underlying
sensing technology to provide critical decision support and control for DC and
telecommunication facilities (TF) operations.
        A key aspect of MMT technology is integration of modeling tools to understand
how changes in one operational parameter affect the overall DC response. It is
demonstrated that reduced ordered models for DC can generate, in less than 2 seconds
computational time, a three dimensional thermal model in a 50 kft2 DC. This rapid
modeling enables real time visualization of the DC conditions and enables “what if”
scenarios simulations to characterize response to “disturbances”. One such example is
thermal zone modeling that matches the cooling power to the heat generated at a local
level by identifying DC zones cooled by a specific CRAC. Turning off a CRAC unit can
be simulated to understand how the other CRAC utilization changes and how server
temperature responds.
        Several new sensing technologies were added to the existing MMT platform: (1)
air contamination (corrosion) sensors, (2) power monitoring, and (3) a wireless
environmental sensing network. All three technologies are built on cost effective sensing
solutions that increase the density of sensing points and enable high resolution mapping
of DCs. The wireless sensing solution enables Air Conditioning Unit (ACU) control while
the corrosion sensor enables air side economization and can quantify the risk of IT
equipment failure due to air contamination.
        Validation data for six test sites demonstrate that leveraging MMT energy
efficiency solutions combined with industry best practices results in an average of 20%
reduction in cooling energy, without major infrastructure upgrades. As an illustration of
the unique MMT capabilities, a data center infrastructure efficiency (DCIE) of 87 %
(industry best operation) was achieved.
        The technology is commercialized through IBM System and Technology Lab
Services that offers MMT as a solution to improve DC energy efficiency. Estimation
indicates that deploying MMT in existing DCs can results in an 8 billion kWh savings and
projection indicates that constant adoption of MMT can results in obtainable savings of
44 billion kWh in 2035. Negotiations are under way with business partners to
commercialize/license the ACU control technology and the new sensor solutions
(corrosion and power sensing) to enable third party vendors and developers to leverage
the energy efficiency solutions.


                                                                                       6
Introduction

        In many of today’s DCs the energy used for cooling can be over 20% of the total
energy use [1-4]. With increasing energy prices and also a commitment from many
industrial and government organization to reduce the carbon footprint, there is a need to
develop comprehensive technologies for energy efficiency. There are many commercial
environmental solutions to measure or to model the temperature, relative humidity, and
air flow in DCs but those solutions tend to be fragmented and require sophisticated
integration tools. There is a clear need for a common platform that would integrate both
the software tools and the underlying technology components (sensing and control) to
provide critical decision support and controls for DC/TF operations.
        The key component of such technologies is scalability at existing or new facilities
under a common platform for data management, modeling, and visualization. To model
DC operation external data sources like IT server sensors, building management system,
and complementary data like weather should be integrated. For DCs that use outside air
for cooling, it may be necessary to understand how indoor air quality is affected by the
location of pollution sources and how pollution spreads based on wind speed and
direction.
        While monitoring the DC/TFs is a prerequisite for energy efficiency, control
strategies are required to optimize the operation of air conditioning units (ACU) as well
as of the free cooling (water and/or air side). For optimum control, the environmental
sensors would provide feedback data to support the control settings and to validate the
attainable efficiency.
        Air side economization is investigated as the most direct way to reduce the
energy used for cooling. Based on simulations of DCs operations, Lawrence Berkley
National Laboratory (LBNL) demonstrated that outside air cooling can reduce up to 25%
of the total energy used for cooling [5]. However, with outside air cooling, the relative
humidity may go as high as 90% and can create a potential risk of condensation [5].
Another concern for using outside air is the possibility to introduce air pollutants along
with the “fresh air”. Air pollution can result in an increased particulate matter (dust) and
corrosion of IT in the DC [6]. Studies undertaken by LBNL demonstrated that corrosion
rate of the outside air can exceed 300 Å/month [7], a value that is considered the upper
level of air pollution for reliable IT operations [8]. Industry standards recommend a
corrosion rate of 300 Å/month for copper and 200 Å/month for silver to be maintained in
a DC [6,8]. Thus, cost effective corrosion sensors could enable the use of outside air
while protecting the IT equipment.
        The effectiveness of recommendation from energy efficiency solutions can be
achieved through measurement of a common metric before and after energy
optimization. One such metrics is the data center infrastructure efficiency (DCIE) that is
calculated by dividing IT equipment power by total facility power. To improve the DCIE
for a DC, besides environmental sensing, additional actions should be considered like
capacity planning, virtualization, consolidation, provisioning and cloud computing
approaches.
        In this report the energy savings obtained in field testing the MMT technology at
6 test sites is described and the obtainable energy savings using MMT are quantified.
Detailed description of achievable savings in a DC is included for a test site where a
DCIE of 87 % was demonstrated. Descriptions of the sensor technology and validation
studies are presented along with the description of the modeling tools.



                                                                                          7
Background
    The energy efficiency of DC is largely determined by the extent to which “best
practices” are implemented, both when physically planning and operating the DC [3,9]
For example, power consumption of the cooling system, which is a significant fraction of
the total power needs, is dominantly governed by the placement of the IT or switching
equipment, the chilled air flow control mechanisms, perforated tile placement,
confinements of the cold and warm aisles, among other factors.
    Many of the DC “best practices” are well documented in the open literature [3,9] and
in addition, there are several solutions such as energy assessments, virtualization and
consolidation technologies, and modeling services which are all designed to improve DC
energy efficiency.
          Every DC is different and to improve energy efficiency for a particular DC, a
subset of best practices may apply. To develop a solution that can be applied across
many data centers, a set of requirements has to be integrated:

   1) Scalability: the technology can be applied to any type of data centers on large
      scale for cost effectiveness
   2) Provability: the technology should be able to measure quantitatively the resulting
      efficiency improvements based on an industry acceptable standard metrics
   3) Manageability: physical energy efficiency improvements have to be manageable
      without compromising reliability of the operation. Computational Fluid Dynamics
      of “what-if” modeling scenarios ensures that any implemented changes will not
      compromise the reliability.
   4) Integrate-ability: significant energy efficiency improvements will originate from
      integrating the various dimensions involved in DC/TFs through a single
      management platform
   5) Feasibility: tighter integration between IT and facilities will allow targeting
      virtualization and consolidation projects to provide maximum benefits without
      major infrastructure investments.

    To address these challenges, MMT 2.0 was developed under supports from the
Industrial Technologies Program of the DOE Office for Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy (EERE) to improve energy efficiency in the information technology sector. MMT
2.0 is being built upon an earlier developed solution, which is complemented with a real-
time, high resolution measurement system using sensor networks (for temperature,
power, humidity, corrosion rates etc.), embedded IT equipment sensors and other data
sources (e.g., from building management systems). The technology deploys novel
measurement-based, energy and thermal modeling methods for generating real-time
data (i.e. 3D heat, power distributions, cooling provisioning, corrosion risks for outside
air usage etc.) for optimum manageability of the facilities’ energy efficiency. MMT 2.0 will
provide control of the fans and set points in the air conditioning units (ACU) as well as
manage free cooling (water and/or air side). The technology will yield ongoing best
practices recommendations including the physical IT layout and leverage circuit-level
power monitoring, which enables not only optimum provisioning but also reduces power
delivery losses.




                                                                                          8
Results
        The MMT technology was field tested at 6 locations chosen to be representative
of operating DCs and TFs; three IBM’s facilities in Boulder (CO), Raleigh (NC), and
Poughkeepsie (NY) in addition to three AT&T facilities in Anaheim (CA), Bothell (WA),
and Dallas (TX).
        As an initial step, the MMT mobile cart was used to map the temperature and the
relative humidity in DC/TFs to establish baseline and generate recommendations. In the
second phase MMT was deployed to monitor spatio-temporal changes and to assess
how recommendations improved the DC efficiency.
        Savings were demonstrated for each of the 6 test sites as a result of the
deployment of MMT. The average savings for the sites was 24.8% of the cooling load
and 6.3% of the IT load (Table 1).

                                                                        Annual    Annual
                                                                        energy    savings
                                                                        Savings
       Site            UPS       Required     Active #     # CRAC       MWh/yr      $/yr
                     Load kW     # CRAC        CRAC       shutdown
   Test site #1        5458         117         157          22          1830     $91,516

   Test site #2        3344         57          129          66          3798     $341,814

   Test site #3        1855         39           55           5           325     $15,595


Table 1 Energy savings achieved at 3 field test sites based on MMT analysis and
recommendations.

          A wireless sensing network was developed for flexible deployments in TFs where
equipment layout is frequently changing. The wireless sensing network is based on low
power radios that allow a battery lifetime of 7 years in the field with a sampling rate of 1
minute. The wireless sensing solution reduces the cost of single point sensing by
eliminating the wire and power requirements that are associated with wired solution.
Temperature, relative humidity, air flow, pressure and corrosion sensing are integrated
into the wireless sensing solution. The technology was tested at AT&T’s Anaheim test
facility for over 1 year period (Fig 1).
          A control firmware and algorithm for the wireless sensor network was developed
to control Air Conditioning Units (ACUs). The control scheme optimizes the utilization of
the ACU units by turning off systems that are running at very low utilization (<20%) while
shifting the load to ACUs that have medium utilization (~50%). In a typical DC, the
control can shut off around 20% of the ACUs, resulting in energy savings up to 10%.
Multiple layers of security and control loops were implemented to minimize risk and to
prevent situations where overheating may occur. The DC is continuously monitored by
temperature and pressure sensors to maintain recommended operating temperature and
cooling capacity.




                                                                                             9
Fig 1 Wireless sensing layout at a telecom facility with temperature sensing string attached to the
rack and the radio position on the top of rack.

        A detailed performance auditing of the IBM’s Green Data Center in
Poughkeepsie revealed many inefficiencies and that the DC has a DCIE of 74 %. Some
of the recommendations generated by MMT were the elimination of energy “leaks”,
improving air flow through perforated tiles placement, and workload consolidation on
servers. Furthermore based on “what-if” simulations, the DC layout was rearranged such
that more equipment could be deployed in the DC without increasing the required
cooling power. The implementation led to a DCIE metrics of 87 % representing one of
the highest levels of efficiency in the industry. MMT was instrumental in implementing
the energy efficiency measures and is continued to be used as an active tool to monitor
in real time the DCIE metrics for the Poughkeepsie data center (see Appendix A for
more details).

1. MMT Technology Development
        1.1 Corrosion sensors

        Outside air cooling is the most economical way to reduce energy consumption in
DCs, TFs and industrial facilities. Many DC operators are concerned about the
accidental introduction of air pollutants in the DCs along with the fresh air. This may be
the case if the DC is located in metropolitan or industrial areas, in locations where wild
fires, occur or geographies where large amount of fertilizer/chemicals are used in a
nearby location. Continuous air filtering is a possible solution to minimize contamination
but would increase the operating cost. The most effective way to prevent accidental
pollution of the DC is to monitor in real time the air contamination.
        A common way to monitor the air contamination is the use of corrosion sensors
that measure the reactivity of the contamination molecules with metal films. The
corrosion sensor can be an integral part of a contamination management solution to
monitor the air quality and control the intake valve positions that allow mixing of
outdoor/indoor air ratio. By controlling the amount of outside air used for cooling along
with temperature and relative humidity, the corrosion rates can be maintained at
acceptable values at period of times when outdoor pollution may be higher.
        For corrosion sensor development, large scale semiconductor fabrication
processes were leveraged through wafer scale deposition of the metal traces on silicon



                                                                                                10
substrates. For corrosion rate measurement, the resistance of the metal traces is
electrically measured as the film thickness is reduced as pollutant molecules interact
with the metal film surface. The technology was developed for silver and copper and the
metal film thickness was chosen to be 1.5 μm (lifetime of 7 years at a corrosion rate of
300 Å/month) and the detection has a sensitivity of 1 Å change in film thickness.
        The corrosion sensor was designed to be easily replaceable in the field once the
sensor film is consumed. The sensor is attached to a replaceable Printed Circuit Board
(PCB) card that fits into the communication board and the PCB card is replaced once the
sensor element is consumed (Fig 2). The corrosion sensor performance was compared
with commercially solutions, with the resistive technique fairing better than the quartz
crystal or metal coupon measurements.




Fig 2 Silver corrosion sensor with sensor element and the detection electronics. Sensor lifetime is
7 years in an environment with a corrosion rate of 300 Å/month.

        The sensitivity of the corrosion sensor to gaseous pollution was assessed in a
data center where the indoor corrosion rate was compared with the outdoor fluctuation of
NO 2 , and SO 2 concentration (Fig 3). When the outdoor contamination is low (from 10
am until 4 pm), the corrosion rate drops below 300 Å/month while in general the
corrosion rate can be as high as 600 Å/month the rest of the days. The indoor corrosion
rate was tracking the outdoor pollutants concentration, demonstrating the link between
high corrosion rate and poor air quality. The data demonstrate that outdoor pollution
levels are driving the indoor corrosion rate and there is a direct correlation between
outside air pollution and indoor corrosion rate (that is expected if the DC is not fully
sealed from the outside).
        Corrosion is a synergistic result of temperature, humidity, air flow and gaseous
contamination. To identify the main driving factors for corrosion, a facility wide
temperature, relative humidity, and air flow should be monitored and modeled to identify
high corrosion risk zones. Field test of the corrosion sensor technology demonstrated
that the corrosion rate measured in a DC is dependent on the location where the sensor
is placed. To achieve the best repeatability, the corrosion sensors can be placed at the
outlet of ACU units (under the raised floor) or at the rack air intake. The corrosion
sensors were tested at a TF Anaheim where a the corrosion rate of less than 120
Å/month was measured during the summer months and the value increased closer to
200 Å/month during autumn and winter months.




                                                                                                11
                                                                                                 Day 1              Day 2
                                                                                   900




                                                          Silver corrosion
                                                           rate (A/month)
                                                                                   600                                                High
                                                                                                                                      risk




                        Indoor
                                                                                   300
                                                                                                                                      Low
                                                                                                                                      risk
                                                                                        0
                                                                                  0.010




                                                      SO2 concentration
                                                                                  0.008




                                                                          (ppm)
                                                                                  0.006
                        Outdoor



                                                                                  0.004

                                                                                  0.002



                                                                                   0.10
                                                       NO2 concentration




                                                                                   0.08

                                                                                   0.06
                                                            (ppm)
                        Outdoor




                                                                                   0.04

                                                                                   0.02

                                                                                            0    8     16    24      32       40 48
                                                                                                            H ours
Fig 3 Indoor corrosion rate and the corresponding outdoor SO 2 and NO 2 gaseous concentration
for a two day period.

        The corrosion rate in an air side economized data center depends on the amount
of outside allowed in the DC. In one of the test studies, the corrosion rate was below 120
Å/month during summer when no air side economization was used. During the winter
season, the air side economizer was enabled and occasionally the corrosion rate
increase for short periods of time well above 300 Å/month while most of the time the
corrosion rate was below 200 Å/month (Fig 4).
                                                                                                            8/29-12/29/2011


                                                    2000
                         Corrosion rate (A/month)




                                                    1500                                                     300 A/month


                                                    1000


                                                     500


                                                       0
                                                             0                    500           1000     1500       2000
                                            Time (hours)
Fig 4 Corrosion rate in an air side economized data center.




                                                                                                                                             12
        The corrosion data from the economized data center proves that contamination
monitoring would be beneficial as the corrosion rate can have excursion to large values.
The corrosion sensing solution is fully integrated with MMT and is an effective solution to
preserve the reliability of IT equipment in air side economized DCs or for DCs situated in
polluted geographies.
        A corrosion management solution was developed to manage the risk in data
center due to air pollution or operation of DC at high level of temperature and humidity.
Since corrosion can be accelerated by increased temperature and relative humidity
levels, optimizing the data center environment (controlling dew points and the amount of
outside air introduced in the DC) can minimize the risk. The corrosion sensors can also
measure the effectiveness of air filtration in DCs and asses the time when air filters has
to be changed.

       1.2 Power sensors

        To monitor the energy consumption in DCs, an accurate and non-intrusive power
monitoring solution was developed based on Hall sensors. The power monitoring
solution is suitable for dense monitoring of the power consumption at panel and
distribution circuit levels. Furthermore, the power sensing solution could identify branch
circuits to which the IT equipment is connected by analyzing the correlation between
branch circuit and IT equipment power patterns.
        The Hall sensor is embedded in a ferrite bead that clamps on the power carrying
cable and is measuring the Alternating Current (AC) current. The signal is sampled at a
rate of 60 data point/seconds and the root mean square amplitude of the current is
determined numerically. Calibration was carried out for different gauge wires, commonly
encountered in data centers, to calibrate the Hall sensor output versus the current in the
cable. For power factor calculations, the voltage is also sampled in real time through
electrostatic pickup by a wire running parallel through the ferrite bead. The fast sampling
allows digital signal processing to determine the phase lag between the current and
voltage signal. Signal processing and power factor calculations are carried out on the
Signal Processing Board (SPB) and Collection Computer Board (CCB) (Fig 5).




Fig 5 Power sensors, power sensor board (7 sensors), the Signal Processing Board and the
Collection Computer Board for real time power monitoring.




                                                                                        13
For installation of the power sensors, while avoiding power down of power panels, a new
method was developed where an inexpensive clamp to install the ferrite on a cord can
be used while wearing just protective gloves. The implementation and installation of the
clamp and ferrite beads is illustrated in Fig 6. The power sensing data and the digital
signal processing carried out on the CCB board are integrated with MMT server. The
technology was tested in two DCs and demonstrated a better sensitivity than existing
power monitoring solutions, at a fraction of cost.




Fig 6 Sensor and clamping approach of the ferrite beads on a power cable.

2. MMT Modeling Technologies
       2.1 Computational Fluid Dynamics modeling

         Current state-of-the-art numerical modeling approaches in DCs rely on the use of
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models based on solving the Navier-Stokes
equations for air flow coupled with an equation for heat transfer. While this approach has
been successfully used and is the most accurate modeling technology, especially for
planning purposes, it comes with long calculation times, making it unsuitable for
performing (near) real-time simulations. In addition, it is often not clear whether the
quality of the modeling input data warrants such detailed or time-consuming
computations. Hence one of the focus areas within MMT has centered on the
development of simpler and, computationally speaking, faster CFD models for air and
heat transfer, thus leveraging the fact that the availability of real-time measurement data
could be “traded” against the complexity of the partial differential equations comprising
the model. Real-time sensor measurements, which provide information about current (i.e.
realistic) conditions in a data center, are used to define the required input information,
mainly in the form of boundary data for the boundary value problems defining the models.
         The MMT deployment at a Video Hub Office (VHO) provides a useful example of
the value of the analytics in MMT for predicting changes in cooling resources. After
analyzing the real time environmental data, it was determined that there was more
cooling capacity in that facility than needed. It was recommended that the VHO would
have plenty of cooling capacity even with one of the four ACU’s turned off. In order to
see how the environment might change under these conditions, an underutilized ACU
unit was virtually ‘turned off’ in the MMT client software. The simulation of 3 ACU
operating was compared with the experiment where the ACU was shut down. With all
four ACU’s on, the cooling zones are as shown on the left (Fig 7). The middle figure



                                                                                       14
show the simulations result when one ACU is turned off and the cooling zones merge
from four to three zones. The right figure shows the cooling zones using the analytics on
the real time data after that ACU was turned off in the facility. The prediction and the
actual results are overlapping demonstrating the accuracy of the modeling.


          Before                   MMT what-if modeling              Demonstration with
      4 ACUs operate                   with 3 ACUs                     3 ACUs operate




Fig 7 Simulations of the cooling zones before and after MMT implementation.

        2.2 Statistical Thermal Zone Mapping

         In the statistical work, a knowledge based models and trends were developed
and combined with Kriging techniques. A comprehensive knowledge base of thermal
profiles has been generated from MMT data of over 80 DCs showing s-shaped, vertical
temperature profiles across the server inlets of a rack (Fig 8). Analysis of extensive
temperature profiles has shown that the form of s-shape is governed by physical
parameters such as air flow supply and demand, discharge temperatures of the
neighboring ACUs, the relative location with respect to ACUs and other servers. The
statistical models can be used to estimate the temperature distribution in a DC under
constant air flow conditions (Fig 9). The universality of the S-shaped temperature profile
allows the extension of the statistical methods to any DC that use air cooling. The
dynamic model was extended through regression analysis to forecast temperature
profiles in the DC.




Fig 8 S-curve pattern for the vertical temperature profiles for ten different air conditioner settings.
Ten solid curves are the MMT observations at ten settings and the dashed curves are the
statistical model estimations



                                                                                                    15
 Fig 9 Statistical temperature fitting for different heights under fixed air conditioner setting. The
top figures are the MMT temperature measurements where the bottom figures are the fitted
temperature values.

         A statistical method, which leverages temperature measurements from real-time
MMT sensing system, is developed for assigning dynamically thermal zones. Such
thermal zones are generally defined as the region of influence of a particular cooling unit
or cooling "source" (such as an air condition unit (ACU)) and can provide valuable
decision support for optimizing cooling. In order to characterize ACU thermal zones, a
statistical method was developed to model the correlations between temperatures
observed from sensors located at the discharge of an ACU and the other sensors
located in the room. Outputs from the statistical solution were used to optimize the
placement of equipment in a data center (Fig 10), investigate the possible failure
scenarios, and make sure that a proper cooling solution has been achieved.




Fig 10 Thermal zones in a Video Hub Office characterized by the correlation between each of the
four ACU discharge temperatures and the temperatures in the room. It shows that ACU#1 has the
largest impact in its closer vicinity and ACU#1 and ACU#4 have significant larger thermal zones
than ACU#2 and ACU#3.




                                                                                                  16
        2.3 A Spatio-Temporal Prediction Model

       A spatio-temporal model was developed to predict the temperature distribution of
a DC for future time (forecasting) at any locations. The spatio-temporal prediction model
can be used for “what-if” analysis for energy efficiency improvement. The “what-if”
analysis capabilities are demonstrated through an air-flow optimization study (Fig 11) for
the VHO where temperatures are forecasted around the IT racks. Based on temperature
forecast (Fig 11) a dynamic workload allocation can be implemented based on the
thermal profiles of the DC.




Fig 11. Temperature distribution prediction for the next time stamp.

3. Software Development
        A ‘cloud-ready’ analytics repository platform was developed that can be used
independent of the specific hardware platform. The MMT software was extended to
include: (1) an improved and more customize-able alarm system, (2) MMT reporting, (3)
corrosion analytics, (4) real time CFD simulations, and (5) ACU controller.
        A fully automated CFD analytic module embedded in MMT was developed that
requires no user interventions and would run either as a real time simulation or as a
“what-if” module to predict the data center response. The CFD model takes into account
the physical DC layout, rack placement, and sensor distribution. The module will
generate either a 2D or a 3D mesh and the solver will set-up the problem and will start
the execution for CFD simulations. The simulations leverage the existing modeling
capabilities based on reduced order sensor response and will run in less than 2 seconds
computational time for a 50 kft2 DC. The CFD based modeling capabilities can create
temperature, dew point, and plenum pressure modeling and simulations of CRAC
thermal zones, tile flow, tile cooling power and CRAC set-point temperature optimization.
A CFD simulation of thermal zones and CRAC thermal zones is shown in Fig 12.




                                                                                       17
Fig 12 MMT interface for CFD simulation of temperature and cooling power distribution in a data
center.

        A series of real-time “what-if” optimization algorithms for DC have been
developed and implemented into the MMT software. For a given cooling configuration
(which is being measured and characterized in real-time using MMT) an optimization
algorithm allows identifying the optimum placement of new servers (or workloads) or
alternatively where to remove servers or to remove workload. Another optimization
algorithm optimizes performance of the data center without creating hotspots. The
optimization uses a physical model combined with linear and quadratic programming
algorithms as well as linear and non-linear least square fitting (with or without
constraints). The optimization result for optimum workload displacement to obtain best
performance without creating hotspots for a given total power is shown in Fig 13. The
two images correspond to different cooling conditions in the DC.

4. Commercialization
       The corrosion sensor technology that was developed under this program has a
couple of unique features: (1) 7 year lifetime for sensor at a corrosion rate of 300
Å/month, (2) sensitivity better than 1 Å in thickness change, and (3) a field replaceable
sensor. Corrosion rate calculation algorithms were implemented in MMT based on
moving average algorithm. The corrosion sensors and analytics are fully compatible with
MMT.
        The corrosion solution was proposed for licensing to business partners: (1)
companies that are commercializing gaseous filter solution where the corrosion sensor
will ensure that filtration effectiveness and (2) companies that are manufacturing ACU
units to be used in air side economized DCs. The corrosion sensor and management
solution were evaluated by the business partners interested in licensing the technology.
We furthermore conducted “round robin” tests where existing corrosion sensing
technologies were compared side by side to validate IBM’s corrosion sensing
performance. There are ongoing discussions with two air filter manufacturing companies
and also one ACU manufacturing company for corrosion sensor licensing.




                                                                                            18
Fig 13 Optimization of workload placement for a data center with a given cooling capacity.

         For power monitoring solution a licensing agreement with power distribution
companies is considered. The power sensing technology has unique features (small size,
accuracy, non intrusive monitoring, possibility to mount them on “live” power line) and
functionality that allow the current power sensor design to be added to existing power
monitoring solution that exist on the market. Presentations were made to two of the
global companies and negotiations are currently underway for the rights to the
intellectual property covered by the patent applications filed under this project with at
least one of the companies.

5. Benefit Assessment
        Energy efficient technologies could significantly improve the performance for
existing or newly developed DCs. From the field tests it was demonstrated that MMT can
achieve a 20% to 40% reduction in energy used for cooling, by implementing various
technology components and best practices. A list of technologies and associated
benefits are shown in Table 2.

                        Feature                                       Benefits                         Savings
          Real-time heat/humidity/ pressure/flow                  • Prevents hotspots                   3-5 %
                          maps                      • critical for best practices’ implementation
                  Power Management                           • Increases UPS utilization                2-5 %
                                                            •Reduces “stranded” power
                Operational CFD support            • Improves planning and optimize DC layout           3-4 %

               Energy Efficiency Reporting         • Enables consistent management of energy            5-8 %
                                                                    efficiency
                     Cooling Zones                 • increases utilization of cooling infrastructure    3-5 %
                  Air side economizer/                      • Outside air economization                10-15%
                 Corrosion Management                          • Improved reliability


Table 2 Achievable energy savings using MMT technology components.




                                                                                                                 19
        The short and long term impact of MMT commercialization can be estimated for
DC/TFs assuming that the technology is adopted by industry. In 2006 it was estimated
that the total energy consumed by data centers to be 60 billion kWh (7 GW) [1]. An
additional 18 billion kWh would be utilized by telecom facilities [4]. Assuming a 20%
savings (see Table 2) applicable to 50% of the DC/TF can result in an instant of 8 billion
kWh savings.
        For long term projection, it is estimated that there were a total of 6400 data
centers in 2006 and their number increases annually by 12 % [1]. It is also assumed that
MMT will be compatible with 50 % of the newly built DCs with a starting deployment date
of 2012. The assumption consider that in 2012, 5% of all newly built DC will adopt MMT
and the adoption will increase with additional 5% each year until 2020 when it will reach
a 50% adoption. Once a 50% penetration is achieved it will remain at that level from
2020 onwards.
        In Table 3 the direct electricity displaced is calculated under the above
assumptions and projected until 2035 assuming that a typical data center consumes 9.5
MkWh (~1.1 MW). The possible cost savings for businesses are calculated based on
MMT deployment (assuming electricity cost of 6 c/kWh).

       Impact By year                       2012     2015        2025     2035

       Cumulative units installed           60       1223        12880    45300

       Market penetration                   5%       25%         50%      50%

       Direct electricity displaced (billion 0.060   1.161       12.243   43.050
       kWh)
       Energy cost savings ($MM/year)       3.6      69.66       734.58   2583.2



Table 3 Economical benefit of adoption of MMT projected until 2035.

Adoption on MMT 2.0 in new data centers could be a game changer to improve the
energy efficiency of existing and future data centers.

6. Accomplishments
       6.1 Publications and Presentations

1. V. López and H. F. Hamann, “Measurements-based modeling for data centers”, In
Proceedings of the 12th IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and
Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (ITherm), June 2010.
2. M. Cole, L. Hedlund, G. Hutt, T. Kiraly, L.J. Klein, S. Nickel, P. Singh, and T. Tofil,
“Harsh Environment Impact on Resistor Reliability”, SMTAI, Orlando, FL, 2010.
3. H. F. Hamann , V. López and A. Stepanchuk, “Thermal zones for more efficient data
center energy management”, In Proceedings of the 12th IEEE Intersociety Conference
on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (ITherm), June
2010.
4. R. Ghosh, and Y. Joshi, " Dynamic Reduced Order Modeling of Convective transports
in Data Centers" at NSF I/UCRC meeting, Binghamton, New York, December 2010.


                                                                                       20
5. H. Li, H.F. Hamann, “A Statistical Approach for Thermal Zone Mapping”, InterPack,
July 2011.
6. V. López and H. F. Hamann, “Heat transfer modeling in data centers”, International
Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol. 54, pp. 5306–5318, 2011.
7. V. López and H. F. Hamann. “A numerical technique for the approximation of thermal
zones”, InterPACK 2011. July 2011.
8. S. Yarlanki, R. Das, H. F. Hamann, V. Lopez, A. Stepanchuk, “Employing Thermal
Zones for Energy Optimization in Data Centers”, InterPack, Proceedings of the ASME
2011 Pacific Rim Technical Conference Exhibition on Packaging and Integration of
Electronic and Photonic Systems, MEMS and NEMS, 2011.
9. R. Das, S. Yarlanki, H. Hamann, J. O. Kephart, V. Lopez, J. Lenchner, “A unified
approach to coordinated energy management in data centers”, CNSM 2011, 7th
International Conference on Network and Service Management, Paris, France, Oct. 24-
28, 2011.
10. W.El-Essawy, A. Ferreira, J. Rubio, M. Ware, K. Rajamani, M. A. Schappert, and H.
Hamann, ”Smarter Data Center Power Monitoring and Management", SenSys '11
Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems ,
2011.
11. R. Ghosh, V. Sundaralingam, S. Isaacs, P. Kumar, and Y. Joshi, “Transient Air
Temperature Measurements in a Data Center”, ISHMT conference, Chennai, India, Dec.
2011
12. R. Ghosh, V. Sundaralingam, P. Kumar, and Y. Joshi, “Experimental
Characterization of a Data Center Facility”, ISTP-22 Conference, Delft, The Netherland,
Nov. 2011.
13. R. Ghosh, and Y. Joshi, ”Dynamic Reduced Order Thermal Modeling of Data
Center Air Temperature”, ASME InterPack 2011 Conference, Portland, USA, 2011.
14. W. El-Essawy, A. Ferreira, J. Rubio, T. Keller, M. Ware, K. Rajamani, M. Schappert
and H. Hamann, "Demo: Smarter Data Center Power Monitoring and Management",
SenSys'11,2011
15. V. López and H.F. Hamann, “Data center metrology and related modeling
techniques”, Presentation at the International Congress on Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (ICIAM), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2011.
16. W. Huang, M. Allen-Ware, J. B. Carter, E. Elnozahy, H.F. Hamann, T. Keller, C.
Lefurgy, J. Li, K. Rajamani, and J. Rubio, “TAPO: Thermal-Aware Power Optimization
Techniques for Servers and Data Centers”, International Green Computing Conference
(IGCC), Best Paper Award, 2011.
17. L.J. Klein et. al ,”Humidity control and dew point management”, ASME InterPack
2011 Conference, Portland, USA, July 2011.
18. L.J. Klein at al, “Corrosion management for Data Centers”, Semitherm 2011.
2. H. Jiang, X. Deng, V. Lopez, H.F. Hamann (Invited) “Online Computer Model
Updating and Forecasting with Applications to Data Center Thermal Management”, The
International Conference on the Interface between Statistics and Engineering (ICISE),
2012.
19. V. Lopez, H.F. Hamann, H.Jiang, and X. Deng, “Mathematical Modeling with Sensor
Data”, SIAM Conference on Mathematics for Industry, 2012.
20. S. Yarlanki, B. Rajendran, and H. Hamann, “Optimization of k-ε turbulence model for
a data center using Neural Networks”, ITherm 2012: Thirteenth Intersociety Conference
on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems, 2012.
21. L. J Klein, M. Schappert, H. F. Hamann, “Corrosion Risk Management in IT
Facilities”, Itherm 2012, May 2012.



                                                                                    21
22. L. J. Klein, Sergio Bermudez, Hans-Dieter Wehle, Stephan Barabasi, H. F. Hamann,
“Renewable Energy Powered Data Centers”, Semitherm 2012.
23. H.F. Hamann and V. López, “Data Center Metrology and Measurement-Based
Modeling Methods”, Book chapter in Energy Efficient Thermal Management of Data
Centers, Y. Joshi and P. Kumar (eds.). Springer. March 2012.
24. R. Ghosh, V. Sundaralingam, and Y. Joshi, "Effect of Rack Server Population on
Temperatures in Data Centers", ITherm 2012.
25. W. El-Essawy, A. P. Ferreira, J. C. Rubio, T. Keller, K. Rajamani, M. Ware, and M.
Schappert , "Managing a Forest Means Measuring Trees: Enabling Data Center Real-
Time Energy Management”, IEEE Transactions on Computers, 2012.



       6.2 Patents/Disclosures

        D. Manzer, L. Klein, “Real Time Numerical Computation of Corrosion rates from
Corrosion Sensors”.
        L. Klein, F. Marianno, H. Hamann, “Air conditioning filter replacement lifetime
prediction and implementations”.
        R. Das, H. F. Hamann, V Lopez, A. Stepanchuk, S Yarlanki, “Provisoning
Cooling Power and workload to optimize utility of cooling units and processing resources
within a data centers”.
        S. Yarlanki, H. LI, A. Stepanchuk, H. Hamann, “Real-time modeling of heat
distributions”.
        G. Carpenter, W. El-Essawy, A. Ferreira, T. Keller, J.C. Rubio and M. Schappert,
“Non-Contact Current and Voltage Sensor”.
        V. López, H. Hamann.        “Techniques for Determining Physical Zones of
Influence.”
        H. Li, H. Hamann, “Data Center Thermal Management”.
        L. Klein and H. Hamann, "Corrosion device for universal assessment of pollution
in data centers”
        L. Klein, H. Hamann, “Forecasting and managing corrosion in energy intensive
facilities and high tech buildings”.
        H. Hamann, H.-D. Wehle, S. A Bermudez, A. Stepanchuk, “Method for evaluating
optimum Data Center Operation“
        H. Hamann, S. A Bermudez, H.-D. Wehle, “Server Rack for improved Data
Center Management“
        S. A Bermudez, H. Hamann, F. J Marianno, “Method for Early Detection of
Cooling-Loss Events“




                                                                                      22
Conclusions
        A scalable and comprehensive energy efficiency solution was developed that
drastically improves the energy efficiency in data centers and telecom facilities. The
MMT platform was extended with a new set of sensing solutions; wireless sensor
network, corrosion sensors, and power monitoring. The sensing solution can be
leveraged to minimize power loss, to eliminate the risk due to accidental pollution from
outside air, or failure risk due to higher temperature operation of data centers. The
modeling and statistical tools offer real time operational support and can be used for
“what if” scenarios; to optimally allocate the workload on IT servers, optimal placement
of an IT rack in a data center, and ACU control. These tools broadly applied can reduce
energy consumption with up to 30% as was demonstrated at field test sites.
        The technologies developed under this grant were benchmarked to demonstrate
their robustness and scalability. It was demonstrated that MMT recommendation can
results in a DCIE of 87 %, one of the best performances in industry. All the developed
technologies are unique in sensitivity, reliability, and accuracy and offer a clear market
advantage for any commercial entity that would license the technology. Discussions are
ongoing with business partners to commercialize the technologies and to deploy them at
large scale to enable energy efficiency implementations, power monitoring, and air side
economizations.




                                                                                       23
        Appendix A
        This section contains the detailed description for the DC energy efficiency factor
obtained for IBM’s Green Data Center in Poughkeepsie. The DC has a surface area of
1100 ft2 and was built in 2009 for hosting IT equipment. The energy intensity of DC is
3407 kBtu/ft2/yr and the estimated Green House Emission is 945 MTCO 2 /year. The DC
meets all the industry standards for indoor environmental conditions: (1) Ventilation for
Acceptable Indoor Air Quality as recommended by ASHRAE Standard 62, (2)
acceptable thermal environmental conditions as specified by ASHRAE standard 55 for
thermal comfort, and (3) adequate illuminations as specified by IESNA Lightning
Handbook for lighting quality.
        The DC contains 8 racks with IT equipment and one ACU unit. The server
infrastructure was : Nine BladeCenter, Fifty System x rack mounted servers, two IBM
Power 570 (POWER6) rack mounted servers, one IBM System z9 and z10, IBM
TotalStorage racks.
        The thermal baseline of the DC was assessed using MMT sensor platform. The
thermal scans at two different heights (0.5 ft and 5.5 ft) reveal that a significant portion of
the DC has elevated temperatures (Fig 14).
        In was established that in more than 8 locations, the rack inlet temperature was
higher than the ASHRAE recommended upper temperature value of 80 ºC. Additionally,
the MMT scan established that:
        (1)         ACU utilization was 77 %. This metric was measuring the ratio of heat
                    removed by the ACU over the nominal ACU removal capacity
        (2)         The targeted air flow was 83%. This metrics measure the percentage
                    of air from ACU that is passing through the perforated tiles.
        (3)         Air recirculation caused the hotspots formation at the inlet of 8 racks.




Fig 14 Thermal scan of the Poughkeepsie data center at 0.5 ft and 5.5 ft prior to optimization.




                                                                                                  24
        The MMT analysis was complemented by the CFD simulations to establish the
air circulation for best rack placement and to establish the spaces where additional
servers can be deployed. After determining the cooling capacity, it was decided to use
rear door heat exchangers for cooling, to remove the heat from the high density rack.
There are several reasons for using water for cooling to support the additional IT load.
Water is 3,500 times more efficient than air at removing heat, and the Cooling
Distribution Unit (CDU) that supports the read door heat exchanger uses less energy
than an ACU. With the additional cooling capacity it was determined that additional
equipment can be added to the DC. The detailed energy use before and after MMT
recommendation implementation is shown in Table 4 (the highlighted areas represent
actual measurements). After optimization, the IT power almost doubled while the cooling
power was just marginally increased.

                     Power (kW)          Start   After optimization   Using water cooling
                     IT                  52.73   91.73                91.73
                     CRAC                4.56    5.1                  5.1
                     CDU                 0       2.6                  2.6
                     Lighting            1.19    0.3                  0.3
                     Other               0.82    0.82                 0.82
                     Data center total   59.3    100.55               100.55
                     Facilities          11.79   20.0                 4.57
                     DCIE                0.74    0.76                 0.87


Table 4 Power measurements before and after MMT optimization. The column “Using water
cooling” was achieved when water from the Hudson River was used for back door water cooling
of the servers.

         In Table 4, the back door water cooling was used for the case and “Using water
cooling”. The racks were cooled with water from the Hudson River in the case of “Using
water cooling”. This was possible once the river temperature was below 43 ºF and the
chiller was turned off and the pumps were used to just pump water.
         The MMT thermal scan at 5.5 ft height after the MMT recommendations were
implemented is shown in Fig 14. Majority of the hotspots are eliminated and the
temperature variation across the DC becomes more uniform.




Fig 15 Thermal map of the data center after energy optimization.




                                                                                            25
       To validate the data center infrastructure efficiency metrics the power
consumption in the data center was measured for a whole year in accordance with US
EPA recommendations [10]. The total consumed power and IT Consumed Power was
measured at 15 minute interval. The data was aggregated in a monthly total power, the
monthly consumed IT power, and the DCIE values was calculated based on the
measured data (Fig 16).


                                                 100000




                          Consumption (kWh)
                          Monthly total Energy
                                                      80000

                                                      60000

                                                      40000

                                                      20000

                                                                     0
                                                                          Jul June May Apr March Feb Jan Dec Nov Oct Sept Aug

                                                                                              Month

                                                      80000
                           Consumption (kWh)
                           Monthly IT Energy




                                                      60000


                                                      40000


                                                      20000


                                                                     0
                                                                          Jul June May Apr March Feb Jan Dec Nov Oct Sept Aug

                                                                                              Month
                                                                    100


                                                                     80
                                                 Monthly DCIE (%)




                                                                     60


                                                                     40


                                                                     20


                                                                     0
                                                                          Jul June May Apr March Feb Jan Dec Nov Oct Sept Aug

                                                                                               Month


Fig 16 Total energy, IT consumed energy, and DCIE variation over a 12 month period.

       A DCIE metrics of 84% (averaged) was maintained in the data center over a 1
year period [11]. Since 2010, MMT technology is monitoring in real-time the DC
performance.




                                                                                                                                26
References

[1] J. G. Koomey, “Estimating Total Power Consumption by Servers in the U.S. and the
World”, A report by the Lawrence, Berkeley National Laboratory, 2007.
http://dl.klima2008.net/ccsl/koomey_long.pdf.
[2] ‘‘Report to Congress on Server and Data Center Energy Efficiency,’’ Public Law 109–
431, United States Code,2008.
[3] W. Tschudi, E. Mills, S. Greenberg, and P. Rumsey, "Measuring and Managing Data-
Center Energy Use", HPAC Engneering,2006.
[4] US Department of Energy, “Vision and Roadmap: Routing Telecom and Data Centers
Toward Efficient Energy Use”, 2009.
[5] A. Shehabi, S. Ganguly, S.K. Traber, H. Price, A. Horvath, W.M. Nazaroff, and A.J.
Gadgil, "Energy Implications of Economizer Use in California Data Centers."
Proceedings of the 2008 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings,
Asilomar, CA, 2008.
[6]      ASHRAE Whitepaper, “Gaseous and Particulate Contamination Guidelines for
Data Centers”, 2011.
[7] H.C. Coles, T. Han, P.N. Price, A.J. Gadgil, and W.F. Tschudi, “Air Corrosivity in U.S.
Outdoor-Air-Cooled Data Centers is Similar to That in Conventional Data Centers”,
Department of Energy (EERE),2011.
[8] ANSI/ISA-71.04-1985, “Environmental Conditions for Process Measurement and
Control Systems: Airborne Contaminants”, ANSI/ISA-The Instrumentation, Systems, and
Automation Society, 1986.
[9] H. F. Hamann, T. G. van Kessel, M. Iyengar, J.-Y. Chung, W. Hirt, M. A. Schappert, A.
Claassen, J. M. Cook, W. Min, Y. Amemiya, V. Lopez, J. A. Lacey, and M. O’Boyle,
"Uncovering energy efficiency opportunities in data centers", IBM J.Res. & Dev. Vol.53,
No.3, 10:1-10:12, 2009.
[10] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s ENERGY STAR Program,
“Recommendations for Measuring and Reporting Overall Data Center Efficiency, Version
1 – Measuring PUE at Dedicated Data Centers”, 15 July 2010.
http://www.energystar.gov/ia/partners/prod_development/downloads/Data_Center_Metri
cs_Task_Force_Recommendations.pdf
[11] http://www-01.ibm.com/software/success/cssdb.nsf/CS/LWIS-8FEUFH




                                                                                       27
