          energies
Article
Comparing Performance Metrics of Partial Aisle
Containments in Hard Floor and Raised Floor Data
Centers Using CFD
Emelie Wibron, Anna-Lena Ljung *                  and T. Staffan Lundström
 Division of Fluid and Experimental Mechanics, Luleå University of Technology, SE-971 87 Luleå, Sweden;
 emelie.wibron@ltu.se (E.W.); staffan.lundstrom@ltu.se (T.S.L.)
 * Correspondence: anna-lena.ljung@ltu.se; Tel.: +46-920-491320
                                                                                                     
 Received: 13 February 2019; Accepted: 8 April 2019; Published: 18 April 2019                        

 Abstract: In data centers, efficient cooling systems are required to both keep the energy consumption
 as low as possible and to fulfill the temperature requirements. The aim of this work is to numerically
 investigate the effects of using partial aisle containment between the server racks for hard and
 raised floor configurations. The computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software ANSYS CFX was
 used together with the Reynolds stress turbulence model to perform the simulations. Velocity
 measurements in a server room were used for validation. Boundary conditions and the load of
 each rack were also retrieved from the experimental facility, implying an uneven load between the
 racks. A combination of the performance metrics Rack Cooling Index (RCI), Return Temperature
 Index (RTI) and Capture Index (CI) were used to evaluate the performance of the cooling systems
 for two supply flow rates at a 100% and 50% of operating condition. Based on the combination of
 performance metrics, the airflow management was improved in the raised floor configurations. With
 the supply flow rate set to operating conditions, the RCI was 100% for both raised floor and hard floor
 setups. The top- or side-cover fully prevented recirculation for the raised floor configuration, while it
 reduced the recirculation for the hard floor configuration. However, the RTI was low, close to 40%
 in the hard floor case, indicating poor energy efficiency. With the supply flow rate decreasing with
 50%, the RTI increased to above 80%. Recirculation of hot air was indicated for all the containments
 when the supply rate was 50%, but the values of RCI still indicated an acceptable performance of the
 cooling system.

 Keywords: data center; aisle containment; computational fluid dynamics (CFD); measurements;
 energy efficient




1. Introduction
     The worldwide demand for storage and processing of data has increased rapidly during the last
several years and as a result, the quantity and the size of data centers are increasing [1]. The development
of sustainable facilities is at the same time very important since their energy consumption is extremely
large. In 2012, 1.4% of the total energy consumption in the world originated from data centers [2].
     Uninterrupted operation is the most crucial requirement for data centers [3]. Adequate cooling
of the servers is therefore very important, while over cooling is a waste of energy. In average 40%
of the total energy consumption in data centers is related to the cooling process [4]. Energy efficient
cooling systems are required in order to both keep the energy consumption as low as possible and to
satisfy the temperature requirements in data centers. The general guidelines that specify allowable
and recommended rack intake temperatures are at present 15–32 ◦ C and 18–27 ◦ C, respectively [5].
     Two alternative setups are commonly used in air cooled data centers; hard floor and raised floor
configurations. Cold air is supplied directly to the room from the Computer Room Air Conditioner


Energies 2019, 12, 1473; doi:10.3390/en12081473                                 www.mdpi.com/journal/energies
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                            2 of 17



(CRAC) units if a hard floor configuration is used. In a raised floor setup, the CRAC units deliver cold
air into an under-floor space instead, whereas the air then enters the data center through perforated
floor tiles. It is common practice to place the perforated tiles right beneath the rack intakes in order
to make it more likely that the cold air finds its way to the servers. Cold air bypass is one problem
that may occur as a result of poor airflow management [6]. The cold air then immediately returns
to the outlet of the CRAC units without cooling the servers [7], leading to loss of cooling capacity.
To compensate for this, the supply flow rate must be increased to make sure that enough cold air is
available at the server racks resulting in over-dimensioned cooling systems. Another example of poor
air management is when the exhausted hot air from a server enters the intake side of a server rack,
rather than the outlet of the CRAC unit. This phenomenon is referred to as hot air recirculation.
      In order to efficiently manage the airflow, it is common to form hot and cold aisles by placing
the server racks in parallel rows. When the front sides are facing each other cold aisles are formed,
while back sides facing each other form hot ailses. Aisle containment is a strategy to minimize hot
air recirculation and cold air bypass. Hot aisle containment prevents the hot air from mixing with
cold air by using panels as a physical barrier to enclose the hot aisles. A ceiling void space can be
used to isolate the hot air when moving towards the CRAC units. Cold aisle containment prevents
the cold air supplied by the perforated tiles to mix with hot air by using panels to enclose the cold
aisles. For an ideal cold aisle containment, the total flow rate through the perforated tiles and the
total flow rate demanded by the server racks would be equal. However, there is often air leakage
either from or to the cold aisles in existing data centers. The air leakage makes up for the excess or
deficit in the supply flow rate, compared with the flow rate through the server racks. The aisles can
also be partially contained by using panels on either side or on top of it. The potential to increase
the thermal performance of a server room by the use of partial or full aisle containment has been
verified in several studies, but mainly for cold aisles only. Srinarayana et al. [8] numerically compared
room and ceiling return strategies in both hard and raised floor configurations. Arghode et al. [9]
compared numerical and experimental results of a contained cold aisle to an open cold aisle for both the
under- and over-provisioning of supply air. Sundaralingam et al. [10] experimentally investigated the
performance of the cooling system in different setups with either an open, partially contained or fully
contained cold aisle. Alkharabsheh et al. [11] used an experimentally validated numerical model to
study both open and contained cold aisle setups. Nada et al. [12] numerically studied partial cold aisle
containment and also compared different arrangements of CRAC units and server racks with respect
to airflow management. Values of flow rates through the perforated tiles and rack intake temperatures
were used for validation. In several of the previous studies, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) was
used to provide details of the airflow [8,9,11,12]. Further studies of CFD for airflow management
can be found in the reviews by Chu & Wang [13] and Lu et al. [14]. In this context, it is crucial that
the simulations are trustworthy. Boundary conditions, mesh and application of turbulence models
should for example be carefully addressed to ensure reliable results [11,15]. Different levels of details
are furthermore needed depending on whether the component level, rack level or room level is in
focus [13].
      Detailed flow analysis of hard floor and raised floor setups in the SICS ICE data center in Luleå,
Sweden, has previously been performed with numerical simulations [7,15,16] and measurements [17,18].
The influence of a turbulence model on the fluid flow in a hard floor server room was investigated
by Wibron et al. [15], recommending the Reynolds stress model (RSM) for modeling the flow on a
server room scale. Local details of the steady state and transient flow in hard floor and raised floor
configurations were examined by Wibron et al. [7]. The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of
using partial aisle containment for the different floor types, i.e., considering both cool aisle and hot
aisle containments. The software ANSYS CFX was used to model the flow and temperature fields
inside the server room. Velocity measurements were used for validation of both floor types with open
aisles. Uneven load distribution between servers and the RSM turbulence model were employed in all
simulations. A combination of the performance metrics Rack Cooling Index (RCI), Return Temperature
Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                      3 of 18


model were employed in all simulations. A combination of the performance metrics Rack Cooling
Index (RCI), Return Temperature Index (RTI) and Capture Index (CI) were used to evaluate the
performance      of the cooling system for both hard floor and raised floor configurations. The setups
 Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                    3 of 17
based on the conditions in the existing data center are very well cooled since the flow rate supplied
by the computer room air handler (CRAH) units or perforated tiles exceed the flow rate demanded
byIndex  (RTI) and
    the server   racks.Capture  Index
                         Therefore, the(CI) were
                                         same    usedwith
                                              setups  to evaluate
                                                          only 50%the
                                                                    ofperformance    of the cooling
                                                                       the original supply           system
                                                                                             flow rate         for
                                                                                                        are also
  both  hard-   and   raised floor configurations.  The setups based  on  the conditions   in  the
investigated to study the possibility of increasing the energy efficiency through decreased supply existing  data
  center
flow      are very well cooled since the flow rate supplied by the computer room air handler (CRAH)
       rate.
  units or perforated tiles exceeds the flow through the server racks. Therefore, the same setups with
2.only
   Method
        50% of the original supply flow rate are also investigated to study the possibility of increasing the
  energy efficiency through decreased supply flow rate.
       The geometry and boundary conditions retrieved from the experimental facility is first
presented.
  2. MethodStrategies for validation of the numerical simulations are then addressed, and finally the
grid, simulation settings and performance metrics are discussed.
        The geometry and boundary conditions retrieved from the experimental facility is first presented.
  Strategies
2.1. Geometry for validation of the numerical simulations are then addressed, and finally the grid, simulation
  settings and performance metrics are discussed.
       A server room (Module 2) at the research facility SICS ICE in Luleå, Sweden, was chosen for the
study.   In this data center it is possible to choose whether the cooling system should be based on a
  2.1. Geometry
hard or raised floor configuration, which makes it suitable for the present study. In Figure 1, the
        A server room (Module 2) at RISE SICS North in Luleå, Sweden, was chosen for the study. In this
geometries for both configurations with open aisles are illustrated. The dimensions of the data center
  data center it is possible to choose     between hard or raised floor setups, which makes it suitable for
were 6.484 × 7.000 × 3.150 m3. In Figure 2, the main components and measurement locations are
  the present study. In Figure 1, the geometries for both floor types with open aisles are illustrated.
illustrated. The measurement locations are only shown in Figure             2a, but are the same for both
 The dimensions of the data center were 6.484 × 7.000 × 3.150 m3 . In Figure 2, the main components and
configurations. The locations were chosen from flow field considerations and were intended to
  measurement locations are illustrated. The measurement locations are the same for both configurations.
capture the different flow conditions in the server room. The velocity was measured at the heights of
 The locations were chosen from flow field considerations and were intended to capture the different flow
0.6, 1.0, 1.4, 1.8 and 2.2 m for each location to enable validation of the digital model with open aisles.
  conditions in the server room. The velocity was measured at the heights of 0.6, 1.0, 1.4, 1.8 and 2.2 m for
Partial aisle containment was then imposed in the simulations by using either a side or top cover to
  each location to enable validation of the digital model with open aisles. Partial aisle containment was
partially enclose the aisle between the two rows of server racks. The side cover was located at the end
  then imposed in the simulations by using either a side or top cover to partially enclose the aisle between
of the rows and at the end of the perforated tiles for the hard and raised floor configurations,
  the two rows of server racks. The side cover was located at the end of the rows and at the end of the
respectively. The top cover was located on top of the server racks and reached from the wall out to
 perforated tiles for the hard and raised floor configurations, respectively. The top cover was located on
the end of the rows for both configurations.
  top of the server racks and reached from the wall out to the end of the rows for both configurations.




      Figure 1. Computational domain for (left) the hard floor configuration and (right) the raised floor
     Figure 1. Computational domain for (left) the hard floor configuration and (right) the raised floor
      configuration with open aisles.
     configuration with open aisles.
       In the hard floor configuration, the main components were 10 server racks composed of 0.8 m
      In the hard floor configuration, the main components were 10 server racks composed of 0.8 m
 wide cabinets from Siemon and four computer room air handler (CRAH) units of the label SEE Cooler
wide cabinets from Siemon and four computer room air handler (CRAH) units of the label SEE Cooler
 HDZ-2. The servers inside the racks were not limited to one manufacturer, and temperatures of
HDZ-2. The servers inside the racks were not limited to one manufacturer, and temperatures of the
 the inlets and outlets of the server racks were therefore measured for input to the numerical model.
inlets and outlets of the server racks were therefore measured for input to the numerical model. The
 The location of the inlets and outlets of the servers were furthermore retrieved from measurements in
location of the inlets and outlets of the servers were furthermore retrieved from measurements in the
 the server room. In the raised floor configuration, there were fourteen perforated tiles located in the
server room. In the raised floor configuration, there were fourteen perforated tiles located in the cold
 cold aisle. Covers on the front sides of the CRAH units were used to direct the cold air under the floor.
aisle. The front sides of the CRAH units were covered, and the cold air was supplied through an
 In the experiments, there were two different kinds of perforated tiles with percentage open areas of
 56% and 77%, respectively. The under-floor space was not taken into account in the simulations.
Energies
Energies2019,
         2019,12,
               12,x1473
                    FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                          4 4ofof17
                                                                                                                     17

      An uninterruptible power supply (UPS) was also present in the data center. To include the effect
of flow
      Anblockage the UPSpower
         uninterruptible  was modeled
                                supply without heat
                                       (UPS) was    loads,
                                                 also      while
                                                      present in smaller
                                                                 the dataobstructions,  i.e. cables
                                                                          center. To include        and
                                                                                               the effect
pipes,
of flowwere ignored.
        blockage  the UPS was modeled without heat loads, while smaller obstructions, i.e., cables and
pipes, were ignored.




                 Labeledmain
      Figure2.2.Labeled
     Figure               maincomponents
                                componentsand
                                            andmeasurement
                                                 measurementlocations
                                                               locationsfor
                                                                         for(left)
                                                                             (left)the
                                                                                    thehard
                                                                                        hardfloor
                                                                                             floorconfiguration
                                                                                                   configuration
      and (right) the raised floor configuration with open aisles.
     and (right) the raised floor configuration with open aisles.

 2.2. Boundary Conditions
2.2. Boundary Conditions
      Flow through the servers were not resolved in this study. Boundary conditions were instead
      Flow through the servers were not resolved in this study. Boundary conditions were instead
 applied to the inlet and outlets of the servers and the CRAH units, i.e., the so-called black box model [19]
applied to the inlet and outlets of the servers and the CRAH units, i.e. the so-called black box model
 was used. The supply temperature and the flow rates from both the CRAH units and the perforated tiles
[19] was used. The supply temperature and the flow rates from both the CRAH units and the
 were determined from measurements. The hotwire thermo-anemometer VTlO0 from Kimo was used
perforated tiles were determined from measurements. The hotwire thermo-anemometer VTlO0 from
 to measure the temperatures, while flow rates were measured with the DP-CALC Micromanometer
Kimo was used to measure the temperatures, while flow rates were measured with the DP-CALC
 Model 8715 and the Velocity Matrix add-on kit from TSI. The Velocity Matrix provides area-averaged
Micromanometer Model 8715 and the Velocity Matrix add-on kit from TSI. The Velocity Matrix
 multi-point face velocity measurements. It calculates the average velocity based on the difference
provides area-averaged multi-point face velocity measurements. It calculates the average velocity
 between total and static pressures [20]. The accuracy of the velocity and temperature measurements
based on the difference between total and static pressures [20]. The accuracy of the velocity and
 are ±3% of reading ±0.04 m/s for the velocity range 0.25–12.5 m/s and ±0.4% of reading ±0.3 ◦ C
temperature measurements ◦are ±3% ◦of reading ±0.04 m/s for the velocity range 0.25–12.5            m/s and
 for temperatures from −20 C to 80 C. The supply temperature was measured to 18.3 ◦ C for both
±0.4% of reading ±0.3 °C for temperatures from −20 °C to 80 °C. The supply temperature was
 configurations and hence independent of the measurement location. For the hard floor configuration,
measured to 18.3 °C for both configurations and hence independent of the measurement location. For
 the flow rates were measured through the front sides of all the CRAH units. Each front side was
the hard floor configuration, the flow rates were measured through the front sides of all the CRAH
 divided into 15 measurement zones and the inlet conditions were determined from average velocities.
units. Each front side was divided into 15 measurement zones and the inlet conditions were
 The measured values for the CRAH units are presented in Table 1, showing only a small difference in
determined from average velocities. The measured values for the CRAH units are presented in Table
 velocity between the units.
1, showing only a small difference in velocity between the units.
      Table 1. Inlet velocity from the CRAH units for the hard floor setup at a supply temperature of 18.3 ◦ C.
     Table 1. Inlet velocity from the CRAH units for the hard floor setup at a supply temperature of 18.3
     °C.                                 CRAH Unit          Velocity (m/s)
                                            C1Unit
                                         CRAH                    1.150
                                                          Velocity  (m/s)
                                            C1
                                            C2                1.150
                                                                 1.137
                                            C2
                                            C3                1.137
                                                                 1.173
                                            C3
                                            C4                1.173
                                                                 1.136
                                            C4                1.136

      For the raised floor configuration, the flow rates were measured through all the perforated tiles
     For the raised floor configuration, the flow rates were measured through all the perforated tiles
 (Table 2). Each perforated tile was divided into five regions and the average velocities were used to
(Table 2). Each perforated tile was divided into five regions and the average velocities were used to
 calculate the inlet boundary conditions. To resolve the perforated tiles a very fine mesh is required
calculate the inlet boundary conditions. To resolve the perforated tiles a very fine mesh is required
 when using CFD. A fully open tile model is however regarded to be adequate for tiles if the percentage
when using CFD. A fully open tile model is however regarded to be adequate for tiles if the
 of open area is 50% or more [21]. Therefore, the perforated tiles were modeled as open in this work.
percentage of open area is 50% or more [21]. Therefore, the perforated tiles were modeled as open in
this work. As observed in Table 2, there was a variation in velocity through the individual tiles. A
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                    5 of 17



As observed in Table 2, there was a variation in velocity through the individual tiles. A possible reason
for this was the different loads of the server racks presented in Table 3 and the geometrical effects of
the underfloor spacing. It was furthermore assumed that the mass flow rates supplied into the room
where equal to the mass flow rate out of the room. The outlets were located on top of the CRAH units.

      Table 2. Inlet velocities from the perforated tiles for the raised floor setup at a supply temperature
      of 18.3 ◦ C.

                                          Perforated Tile    Velocity (m/s)
                                                T1               1.197
                                                T2               1.358
                                                T3               1.540
                                                T4               1.228
                                                T5               1.220
                                                T6               1.593
                                                T7               1.594
                                                T8               1.309
                                                T9               1.377
                                               T10               1.512
                                               T11               1.529
                                               T12               1.188
                                               T13               1.206
                                               T14               1.455


                   Table 3. Boundary conditions for the server racks—raised floor configuration.

                                         Mass Flow Rate (kg/s)       Heat Load (W)
                                R1                0.917                   7177
                                R2                0.527                   3879
                                R3                0.804                   6600
                                R4                0.372                   4800
                                R5                0.299                   4167
                                R6                0.354                   4864
                                R7                0.385                   4800
                                R8                0.231                   2423
                                R9                0.197                   2479
                               R10                0.200                   2495


     The heat load produced by the servers results in a temperature difference across the servers which
can be obtained from:
                                                      q
                                             ∆T = .                                                 (1)
                                                     mcp
where q is the heat load, m is the mass flow rate and cp is the specific heat capacity. A constant
value of cp = 1004.4 J/KgK was used in all simulations. The flow rates were estimated by measuring
the temperature difference across each server rack with temperature sensors from Raritan called
DPX2-T1H1. The sensor has an accuracy of ±1 ◦ C for temperatures from −25 ◦ C to 75 ◦ C. The sensors
were placed 1.08 m above the floor on both sides of all server racks. The temperature difference was
used to compute the mass flow rate through each server rack. The load of each server rack as well as
the corresponding mass flow rates are presented in Table 3 for the raised floor configuration, and in
Table 4 for the hard floor configuration. The total heat load in the server room were thus similar for the
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                            6 of 17



two cases, while a distinct variation of heat load was present for the different racks. All walls were
assumed adiabatic; hence, no heat losses from the server room were accounted for. A no-slip boundary
condition implying zero velocity at all surfaces was furthermore applied. Leakage of air from the
server room was not included.

                    Table 4. Boundary conditions for the server racks—hard floor configuration.

                                        Mass Flow Rate (kg/s)            Heat Load (W)
                             R1                 1.190                        7481
                             R2                 0.605                        3933
                             R3                 0.826                        6578
                             R4                 0.438                        4800
                             R5                 0.310                        4174
                             R6                 0.353                        4864
                             R7                 0.453                        4799
                             R8                 0.240                        2428
                             R9                 0.223                        2479
                            R10                 0.243                        2625


2.3. Validation
     Velocity was measured for both raised and hard floor configurations with open aisles to validate
the simulations. The experimental approach was similar to the one presented in Wibron et al. [15].
The anemometer ComfortSense Mini from Dantec with the omnidirectional 54T33 Draught probe was
used in the experiments. The accuracy is ±2% of reading ±0.02 m/s for the velocity range 0.05–1 m/s,
and ±5% of reading for the velocity range 1–5 m/s. Velocity was measured in the locations L1-L5
presented in Figure 2, at five heights (0.6 m, 1.0 m, 1.4 m, 1.8 m and 2.2 m). The chosen duration, 60 s,
and sampling frequency, 10 Hz, of the measurements was after evaluation considered sufficient for the
time-averaged velocities.

2.4. Grid Study
      The raised floor configuration with an open aisle was chosen for the grid study. Following the
methods described in [15], Grid Convergence Index (GCI) and Richardson’s extrapolation [22] was
utilized to evaluate the discretization error. The solutions of three tetrahedral grids created in ANSYS
Meshing were compared in the study. The refinement factor of the grids was determined from:
                                                                  !1/D
                                                        N f ine
                                                r=                                                    (2)
                                                        Ncoarse

The number of elements are represented by N and the number of dimensions by D. Error bars for the
computed profiles was determined using the GCI with an average value of p = Pave as a measure of the
global order of accuracy [23]. For a constant refinement factor, the order of p was calculated as:

                                                        ln|32 /21 |
                                                 p=                                                   (3)
                                                          ln(21 )

where ε32 = φ3 –φ2 , ε21 = φ2 –φ1 . φ3 , φ2 and φ1 are the solutions on the coarse, medium and fine grid,
respectively. The relative error was approximated from:

                                                          φ1 − φ2
                                                 e21
                                                  a =                                                 (4)
                                                            φ1
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                7 of 17



and the convergence index of the fine grid was:

                                                          1.25e21
                                                               a
                                             GCI21
                                                f ine
                                                      =    p                                              (5)
                                                          r21 − 1

      The extrapolated values were:
                                             p           p       
                                       φ21
                                        ext = r21 φ1 − φ2 / r21 − 1                                       (6)

2.5. Simulation Settings
      Time-averaged flow fields from transient simulations were used in the analysis since steady-state
simulations did not converge due to fluctuations in the flow field. Values of velocity and temperature
were logged at locations L1-L5 to ascertain that the simulations reached a statistically steady state. After a
start up simulation period of 60 s, transient averages where recorded for 360 s to obtain time-independent
results. A constant time-step equal to 0.05 s was decided on the basis of convergence. The time-step
corresponded to an RSM Courant number of around 2 at operating conditions. The convergence
criteria were set to 10−5 for each time-step.
      A common choice of turbulence model for data center applications is the k-ε model. However,
the k-ε model is less accurate in regions of low velocity and the Reynolds stress model (RSM) is therefore
a better choice [15]. Therefore, the RSM was used to model turbulence in this study. The RSM does not
assume isotropic turbulence. Instead, it solves additional transport equations for the six individual
Reynolds stresses in order to obtain closure of the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations
that govern the transport of the time-averaged flow quantities. A wall function approach was used in
ANSYS CFX to model the boundary layer where the velocity approaches zero close to solid walls.
      Buoyancy effects should also be taken into account when modeling the airflow in data centers [24].
The Archimedes number represents the ratio of natural and forced convection and is expressed by:

                                                      βgL∆T
                                               Ar =                                                       (7)
                                                          V2
where L is a vertical length scale, ∆T is the temperature difference between hot and cold regions and V
is a characteristic velocity. An Archimedes number of order 1 or larger indicates that natural convection
dominates. In this study, Ar ≈ 2 and buoyancy is therefore included with the full buoyancy model in
ANSYS CFX.

2.6. Performance Metrics
     The Rack Cooling Index (RCI) is a measure of how well the servers are cooled and maintained within
thermal guidelines [25,26]. Over-temperature conditions exist when the intake temperature at some
server racks exceed the maximum recommended temperature. A summation of the over-temperatures
of each rack gives the total over-temperature. RCI can be used to evaluate under-temperature conditions
as well, but only the high side of the temperature range is analyzed here. The RCI was defined as:
                                                                    !
                                             Total over − temp
                              RCIHI = 1 −                            100%                                 (8)
                                          Max.allowable over − temp

where the maximum allowable over-temperature is a summation of the difference between the
maximum allowable and maximum recommended temperature across all the server racks. The RCI
reaches its ideal value of 100% if all rack intake temperatures are below the maximum recommended
temperature. Values below 100% mean that the intake temperature for one or more server rack exceeds
the maximum recommended temperature.
 Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                         8 of 17



      The RCI can be improved by increasing the flow rate or decreasing the temperature. However,
 these actions would increase the energy consumption. The Return Temperature Index (RTI) is a
 measure of the energy performance of the cooling system [27]. It is defined as:
                                             h                            i
                                     RTI =        Treturn − Tsupply /∆Tequip 100%                                    (9)

 where Treturn , Tsupply and ∆Tequip are weighted averages of the return temperature, supply temperature
 and temperature difference across the server racks, respectively. Deviations from 100% indicate
 declining performance. Values above 100% indicate mainly hot air recirculation and values below
 100% indicate mainly cold air bypass.
      The Capture Index (CI) is based on the airflow patterns associated with either the supply of cold
 air or the removal of hot air [28]. The CI based on the supply of cold air is considered here and it is
 defined as the fraction of air that originates from the CRAH units. The ideal value is 100% which
 means that there is no hot air recirculation. Otherwise, the value is lower.

 3. Results and Discussion
      Discretization and modelling errors are first addressed through grid study and comparison with
 experimental measurements. The performance metrics CI, RCI and RTI are then compared for different
 confinement strategies and supply flow rates.

 3.1. Grid Study
       Errors originating from discretization was assessed using the GCI and Richardson’s extrapolation
 for the raised floor configuration with an open aisle. The number of elements were 430,316, 932,066
 and 2,025,136 for the coarse, medium and fine grid, respectively, leading to r = 1.3. The maximum
 cell sizes were 0.140 m, 0.106 m and 0.080 m for the respective grids. Inflation layers were used to
 attain a better resolution close to the walls, leading to an average y+ of around 25. The flow field in a
 data center is complex with large velocity gradients depending on the position. This makes it suitable
 for the grid convergence study and transient averages of the velocity profiles along L5—a position
 where the inlet supply air flow is redirected towards the servers and where experimental data also
 exists—to be compared. The velocity profiles of three grids are presented in Figure 3a together with an
 extrapolated curve based on Richardson’s extrapolation. The local order of accuracy p ranges from
 0.0232 to 26.86, with a global average of 3.640. Calculated error bars for the fine grid are presented in
 Figure2019,
Energies 3b. 12,
             Based   onPEER
                 x FOR  the REVIEW
                            grid study, the fine grid is considered to give acceptable results and all 9further
                                                                                                          of 18
 work was carried out with this grid size.




      Figure 3. Velocity profiles along L5 for (a) all the different grids and (b) the fine grid with error bands.
    Figure 3. Velocity profiles along L5 for (a) all the different grids and (b) the fine grid with error bands.

3.2. Validation
     Both configurations with open aisles have been used for validation. For this study, where one of
the main focuses is on the airflow in terms of recirculation between aisles, velocity was chosen as the
means of comparison. With the velocity measurements, the validity of the correlation between server
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                                      9 of 17



3.2. Validation
      Both configurations with open aisles have been used for validation. For this study, where one
of the main focuses is on the airflow in terms of recirculation between aisles, velocity was chosen as
the means of comparison. With the velocity measurements, the validity of the correlation between
server load and mass flow (Equation (1)) can also be analyzed. A comparison of transient averages
of velocity profiles and experimental values is shown in Figure 4. In general, good agreement was
found between simulations and experimental values even though the flow field is very complicated
with large velocity gradients. For the hard floor configuration, L1 was located between the inlets of
two of the CRAH units and L5 was located behind a server rack inside the hot aisle. The simplified
boundary conditions managed to recreate the velocity profiles from the measurements. At L3, outside
the end of the hot aisle, the velocity was under-estimated by the simulations. It indicated that the
airflow was pushed upwards and stays close to the ceiling on its way back to the CRAH units to a
higher extent in the simulations than in the existing data center. For the raised floor configuration,
very good agreement was obtained for L2–L5, while deviations were found for L1. This measurement
location was close to the cover in front of the CRAH units and large velocity gradients were found in
this region. L5 was located above a perforated tile in the cold aisle, indicating that the fully open tile
         Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                10 of 18
model gave    an accurate velocity profile.




      Figure 4.Figure 4. Velocity
                Velocity          profiles
                           profiles for (a)forthe
                                               (a) the
                                                   hardhard floor
                                                         floor    configuration and
                                                                configuration    and(b) thethe
                                                                                      (b)    raised floorfloor
                                                                                                raised     configuration
                                                                                                                configuration
               with open
      with open aisles.   aisles.


3.3. Flow3.3. Flow Fields
          Fields
                To illustrate the flow field of the air, Figure 5 shows transient averages of velocity and
     Transient averages of velocity and temperature on a plane through C2 and C4 (see Figure 2) is
         temperature on a plane through C2 and C4 (see Figure 2) for the hard floor configuration with an
presented  in Figure
         open            5 for
               aisle. It is      the hard
                            apparent        floorare
                                      that there   configuration
                                                      large velocity with    an open
                                                                      gradients.         aisle. units
                                                                                  The CRAH       It is supplied
                                                                                                       apparentcold thatairthere
                                                                                                                            at   are
large velocity  gradients.
         a higher  flow rate than Thedemanded
                                       CRAH units by thesupplied      cold
                                                          server racks,      airparts
                                                                         hence   at a of
                                                                                       higher    flow
                                                                                          the cold      rate immediately
                                                                                                    air were   than required by
         returned
the servers,  henceto the
                       partsunits
                               ofwithout  entering
                                   the cold          the servers.
                                              air were             Low temperatures
                                                          immediately       returnedwere      found
                                                                                         to the       in front
                                                                                                  units        of theentering
                                                                                                          without     server     the
         racks while   the  highest temperatures    were   found  close to the ceiling. Figure
servers. Low temperatures were found in front of the server racks while the highest temperatures6 correspondingly    shows
         transient averages of velocity and temperature on a plane through C2 and C4 (see Figure 2) for the
were found close to the ceiling. Figure 6 correspondingly shows transient averages of velocity and
         raised floor configuration with open aisles. As well as this, part of the cold air returned directly to
temperature   on a plane through C2 and C4 (see Figure 2) for the raised floor configuration with open
         the CRAH unit without entering the servers. Low temperatures were found in front of the server
aisles. As  well
         racks    as this,
               while   most part
                              of theof the
                                    heat wascold   air returned
                                               retrieved            directly
                                                          at the back           to the
                                                                      of the server     CRAH
                                                                                     racks. Flow unit     without entering
                                                                                                   and temperature     fields    the
           further indicated less mixing of hot and cold air returning to the CRAH unit for the raised floor
           configuration (compare Figures 5 and 6).
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                      10 of 17



servers. Low temperatures were found in front of the server racks while most of the heat was retrieved
    Energies
at the back2019,   12, x server
               of the    FOR PEER REVIEW
                                racks.                                                           11 hot
                                       Flow and temperature fields further indicated less mixing of of 18and
    Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                         11 of 18
cold air returning to the CRAH unit for the raised floor configuration (compare Figures 5 and 6).




          Figure 5. Velocity and temperature on a plane through the center of computer room air handler
      Figure 5. Velocity and temperature on a plane through the center of computer room air handler (CRAH)
         Figure
          (CRAH)5.2Velocity  and
                    and 4 (see    temperature
                               Figure           on a floor
                                      2) in the hard  planeconfiguration
                                                            through the with
                                                                         center
                                                                              anof computer
                                                                                 open aisle. room air handler
      2 and 4 (see Figure 2) in the hard floor configuration with an open aisle.
          (CRAH) 2 and 4 (see Figure 2) in the hard floor configuration with an open aisle.




      Figure 6. Velocity and temperature on a plane through the center of the CRAH 2 and 4 (see Figure 2) in
          Figure 6. Velocity and temperature on a plane through the center of the CRAH 2 and 4 (see Figure 2)
      the Figure
          raised
          in      floor
                  6.
             the raised configuration
                     Velocity
                        floor and      withwith
                                            anonopen
                                  temperature
                              configuration           aisle.
                                                  a plane
                                                 an open  through the center of the CRAH 2 and 4 (see Figure 2)
                                                          aisle.
          in the raised floor configuration with an open aisle.
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                                        11 of 17

   Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                    12 of 18
3.4. Comparison of Setups at Operating Conditions
    3.4. Comparison of Setups at Operating Conditions
       Side- and top-covers of the aisle between the server racks were studied to investigate methods to
improveSide-     and top-covers
            the airflow    management.of the aisle
                                               A topbetween     the server
                                                       cover between       theracks  were
                                                                                server  racksstudied
                                                                                                 in theto  investigate
                                                                                                         hard              methods
                                                                                                               floor configuration
    to improve the airflow management. A top cover between the server racks in the hard floor
was not expected to have a positive influence on the air management, but was still included for the
    configuration was not expected to have a positive influence on the air management, but was still
comparison. To get quantitative measures of the differences between setups, the performance metrics
    included for the comparison. To get quantitative measures of the differences between setups, a
RCI, RTI and CI were used for evaluation. Since the RCI is based on the rack intake temperatures,
    combination of the performance metrics RCI, RTI and CI were used for evaluation. Since the RCI is
these temperatures are also further investigated. Figures 7 and 8 illustrate the rack intake temperatures
    based on the rack intake temperatures, these temperatures are also further investigated. Figures 7
forand
     the8hard    and raised floor configurations, respectively. The viewing direction was normal to the
           illustrate the rack intake temperatures for the hard and raised floor configurations, respectively.
front   sides
    The viewingof the   server racks
                     direction           where to
                                 was normal      outlet    conditions
                                                    the front   sides ofwere    applied.
                                                                           the server       Forwhere
                                                                                        racks     the hard   floor
                                                                                                         outlet      configurations,
                                                                                                                conditions     were
there   were hotspots
    applied.   For the hardclosefloor
                                  to theconfigurations,
                                          end of the rows      in the
                                                             there     setup
                                                                    were        with an
                                                                            hotspots      open
                                                                                       close   to aisle.
                                                                                                   the endTheofside
                                                                                                                 the cover
                                                                                                                       rows reduced
                                                                                                                              in the
thesetup
     extentwithof an
                  theopen
                        hotspots.
                             aisle. TheAsside
                                           showncoverinreduced
                                                          Figure 8,
                                                                  thethe    hotspots
                                                                       extent   of the were     eliminated
                                                                                        hotspots.    As shown  ininthe   raised
                                                                                                                      Figure       floor
                                                                                                                               8, the
configurations.
    hotspots wereThe        only tendency
                       eliminated               to hotspots
                                     in the raised              were close toThe
                                                      floor configurations.       theonly
                                                                                       endtendency
                                                                                             of the rows     in the setup
                                                                                                         to hotspots    werewith
                                                                                                                               closean
open    aisle.
    to the  endHowever,
                  of the rows  the
                                 in intake
                                     the setuptemperatures
                                                 with an open    were
                                                                   aisle.kept   well below
                                                                           However,             the maximum
                                                                                        the intake     temperatures  recommended
                                                                                                                         were kept
temperature
    well belowinthe  this  setup, meaning
                        maximum                 that ideal
                                       recommended            values of in
                                                          temperature      thethis
                                                                                RCI  weremeaning
                                                                                   setup,    obtainedthat (Figure
                                                                                                             ideal 9a).
                                                                                                                     valuesThis
                                                                                                                              of result
                                                                                                                                  the
was RCIexpected     based on
          were obtained          the rack
                             (Figure          intake
                                        9a). This       temperatures
                                                   result   was expected  and    given
                                                                              based  onthat     the flow
                                                                                          the rack    intakerate  supplied by
                                                                                                              temperatures       andthe
CRAHgivenunits
            that ortheperforated
                        flow rate tiles
                                      supplied    by the
                                           exceeded      theCRAH     units
                                                             flow rate       or perforated
                                                                          required              tiles exceeded
                                                                                      by the server      racks. The theservers
                                                                                                                          flow ratewere
verydemanded
       well cooled by the
                       but server
                             cold airracks.
                                        bypassThestill
                                                   servers    wereTherefore,
                                                        existed.    very well poorcooled   but cold
                                                                                         values         airRTI
                                                                                                   of the   bypass
                                                                                                                werestill   existed.for
                                                                                                                        obtained
all Therefore,
    setups (Figurepoor 9b).
                         values   of thethe
                              Hence,       RTI   were obtained
                                              servers              for all
                                                         were cooled      andsetups  (Figure within
                                                                                maintained       9b). Hence,   the servers
                                                                                                          the thermal          were
                                                                                                                           guidelines
butcooled    and maintained
      the energy     performance  withinwasthe  thermal guidelines but the energy performance was inadequate.
                                             inadequate.




                            Figure7.7.Rack
                          Figure       Rackintake
                                            intaketemperatures
                                                   temperatures for
                                                                for the
                                                                    the hard
                                                                        hard floor
                                                                              floorconfigurations.
                                                                                    configurations.
    Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                             13 of 18



Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                           12 of 17
  Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                        13 of 18




                              Figure 8. Rack intake temperatures for the raised floor configurations.

                           Figure8.8.Rack
                          Figure     Rack intake
                                           intake temperatures  forthe
                                                  temperatures for  theraised
                                                                        raisedfloor
                                                                                floorconfigurations.
                                                                                      configurations.




          Figure 9. (a)
             Figure   9. Rack Cooling
                         (a) Rack     Index
                                  Cooling   (RCI)
                                          Index   andand
                                                (RCI) (b) Return Temperature
                                                          (b) Return         Index
                                                                     Temperature   (RTI)(RTI)
                                                                                 Index    for all
                                                                                               forsetups.
                                                                                                   all setups.
           Figure
      Hotspots  in9.a(a) Rack
                      data    Cooling
                            center canIndex
                                        be an(RCI) andof(b) Return Temperature  Index (RTI) forbased
                                                                                                all setups.
          Hotspots   in  a data center can  beeffect
                                                an effectpoor   airflow
                                                           of poor       management.
                                                                    airflow  management. CI is
                                                                                             CI is basedon the   airflow
                                                                                                            on the   airflow
patterns,  indicating
    patterns,  indicatingareas where   hot  air  from  the   servers  was  circulated  to the  server    inlets,  which
        Hotspots  in a data areas
                             centerwhere
                                    can be hot   air from
                                            an effect       theairflow
                                                      of poor    serversmanagement.
                                                                          was circulated
                                                                                      CI isto  the server
                                                                                            based             inlets, which
                                                                                                     on the airflow
might   explain
    might        whywhy
            explain    some   server
                            some      racks
                                  server      were  more    exposed   to hotspots  thanthan
                                                                                         others.   TheThe CI for all
                                                                                                                  for the
  patterns,  indicating   areas where   hotracks  were
                                             air from    more
                                                       the      exposed
                                                            servers       to hotspots
                                                                     was circulated           others.
                                                                                     to the server    inlets, CI
                                                                                                               which   all the
server racks in the different setups are shown in Table 5. The values were close to ideal for all servers
  might explain why some server racks were more exposed to hotspots than others. The CI for all the
in all setups, except for R1 in the hard floor configurations. It was located at the end of a row, which
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                   13 of 17



increased the risk of hot air recirculation since it can occur not only over the server rack, but around it
as well. The fact that the CI was worse for R1 than for R1O, which was located at the end of the other
row, was because the airflow rates demanded by R1–R3 were so large.

             Table 5. Capture Index (CI) for the server racks in all setups with 100% supply flow rate.

                                   Hard Floor                                  Raised Floor
                          Open    Side Cover     Top Cover        Open        Side Cover      Top Cover
                           (%)       (%)            (%)            (%)           (%)             (%)
            R1            61.68     84.29           69.70          93.15         99.99           99.92
            R2            99.93     99.99           99.08          99.98         99.99           99.98
            R3            100        100             100           99.99         99.99           99.99
            R4            100        100             100           99.99         99.99           99.99
            R5            100       99.94           99.55          99.99         99.99           99.99
            R6            100       99.94           99.99          99.99         99.99           99.99
            R7            100        100             100           99.99         99.99           99.99
            R8            100        100             100           99.99         99.99           99.99
            R9            100        100            99.98          99.99         99.99           99.99
           R10            99.93     99.97           92.98          98.31         99.99           99.99


     It can be concluded that the temperature distributions in Figures 8 and 9 were directly reflected in
the values of CI, although the CI value is not based on temperature. It is also apparent that the CI
value discloses local problems with the cooling that are smeared out in the RCI performance metrics.

3.5. Comparison of Setups with 50% Supply Flow Rate
     The setups based on the conditions in the existing data center were cooled according to the
thermal guidelines, but the energy performance was poor since the supply flow rate exceeded the flow
rate demanded by the server racks. Therefore, the same setups with only 50% of the original supply
flow rate were investigated. Figures 10 and 11 illustrate rack intake temperatures for the hard and
raised floor configurations, respectively. Reducing the supply flow rate gave more apparent hotspots,
especially close to areas of high server load, but the same tendencies for recirculation appeared for
the setups with 100% supply flow rate. For the hard floor configurations, hotspots were found at the
end of the rows. When the side cover is used, the performance of the cooling system was improved,
but hotspots were still found high up on the server racks. This indicated hot air recirculation over
the rows instead of around them. The hotspots were reduced in the raised floor configurations.
The side cover showed the lowest intake temperatures, while the top cover did not show any apparent
improvement when compared to a fully open aisle when the supply rate was reduced.
Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                     15 of 18
Energies 2019,
Energies       12, x
         2019, 12, 1473
                     FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                     14of
                                                                                                        15  of 18
                                                                                                               17




       Figure 10. Rack intake temperatures for the hard floor configurations with 50% supply flow rate.
       Figure 10.
       Figure     Rack intake
              10. Rack  intake temperatures
                                temperatures for
                                             for the
                                                 the hard
                                                     hard floor
                                                          floor configurations
                                                                configurations with
                                                                               with 50%
                                                                                    50% supply
                                                                                        supply flow
                                                                                               flow rate.
                                                                                                    rate.




      Figure 11. Rack
      Figure 11. Rack intake
                       intake temperatures
                              temperatures for
                                           for the
                                               the raised
                                                   raised floor
                                                          floor configurations
                                                                configurations with
                                                                               with 50%
                                                                                    50% supply
                                                                                        supply flow
                                                                                                flowrate.
                                                                                                     rate.
      Figure 11. Rack intake temperatures for the raised floor configurations with 50% supply flow rate.
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                      15 of 17
Energies 2019, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                        16 of 18


      Although  there obviously
      Although there  obviously were
                                 were hot
                                       hot areas
                                           areas in
                                                 in several
                                                    several of
                                                            of these
                                                               these setups,
                                                                     setups, ideal
                                                                             ideal or
                                                                                   or close
                                                                                      close to
                                                                                            to ideal
                                                                                               ideal values
                                                                                                     values
of RCI were
of RCI  were obtained,
              obtained, (Figure
                        (Figure 12a).
                                 12a). The
                                       The values
                                           values of
                                                   of RTI were considerably
                                                      RTI were   considerably improved
                                                                               improved compared
                                                                                           compared to   an
                                                                                                      to an
airflow  of 100% (Figure 12b), since the extent of cold air bypass  decreased  when   the supply  flow
airflow of 100% (Figure 12b), since the extent of cold air bypass decreased when the supply flow rate  rate
was reduced.
was  reduced.




                    Figure 12.
                    Figure     (a) RCI
                           12. (a) RCI and
                                       and (b)
                                           (b) RTI
                                               RTI for
                                                   for all
                                                       all setups
                                                           setups with
                                                                  with 50%
                                                                       50% supply
                                                                           supply flow
                                                                                  flow rate.
                                                                                       rate.

      The CI for all the server racks in the different setups with 50% supply flow rate are shown in
      The CI for all the server racks in the different setups with 50% supply flow rate are shown in
Table 6. Lower values than for the setups with 100% supply flow rate were obtained for several
Table 6. Lower values than for the setups with 100% supply flow rate were obtained for several server
server racks. A low value of CI does however not automatically imply that temperatures are above
racks. A low value of CI does however not automatically imply that temperatures are above
recommended values. If the temperature of the surrounding environment is sufficiently low, the server
recommended values. If the temperature of the surrounding environment is sufficiently low, the
rack will still be adequately cooled. A cooling set up with low CI is however usually more complex
server rack will still be adequately cooled. A cooling set up with low CI is however usually more
and unpredictable, and high values of CI are therefore preferable. This is also an indication that a
complex and unpredictable, and high values of CI are therefore preferable. This is also an indication
combination of performance metrics based on both rack intake temperatures (Figures 10–12) and
that a combination of performance metrics based on both rack intake temperatures (Figures 10–12)
airflow patterns provide a more comprehensive result than a single performance metric does.
and airflow patterns provide a more comprehensive result than a single performance metric does.
                    Table 6. CI for the server racks in all setups with 50% supply flow rate.
                    Table 6. CI for the server racks in all setups with 50% supply flow rate.
                                  Hard Floor                                 Raised Floor
                          Hard Floor                                           Raised Floor
          Open      Open       Side Cover TopTop
                        Side Cover               Cover
                                              Cover             Open
                                                               Open         Side
                                                                             SideCover
                                                                                  Cover         Top Top
                                                                                                    Cover
                                                                                                        Cover
                     (%)           (%)          (%)               (%)           (%)                (%]
           (%)              (%)              (%)                (%)               (%)                     (%]
 R1       R1
          44.66     44.66 69.50 69.50          47.64
                                            47.64                8686           96.88
                                                                                 96.88            82.4682.46

 R2       R2
          80.09     80.09 86.21 86.21          60.32
                                            60.32                87.61
                                                               87.61            90.63
                                                                                 90.63            93.1093.10
 R3       85.74
          R3        85.74 91.26 91.26       90.89
                                               90.89           96.16
                                                                 96.16           96.81
                                                                                96.81             97.4097.40
 R4       99.28
          R4        99.28  99.70  99.70     97.14
                                               97.14           99.91
                                                                 99.91           99.89
                                                                                99.89             99.7099.70
 R5       96.51
          R5        96.51  86.65  86.65     84.37
                                               84.37           98.04
                                                                 98.04           97.85
                                                                                97.85             99.2599.25
 R6       99.79            91.90            99.80              99.68             99.48                 99.07
          R6        99.79         91.90        99.80             99.68          99.48             99.07
 R7         100             100              100               99.24               99                  99.80
          R7         100           100          100              99.24           99               99.80
 R8         100            99.99            99.95              99.25             99.61                 99.84
 R9       R8100      100    100 99.99          99.95
                                            90.17                99.25
                                                               99.89            99.61
                                                                                 99.95            99.8499.22

 R10      R9
          95.79      100 99.98 100             90.17
                                            39.17                99.89
                                                               94.11            99.95
                                                                                 99.32            99.2293.51
         R10        95.79          99.98           39.17         94.11          99.32             93.51
4. Conclusions
4. Conclusions
     In this study, the effects of using partial aisle containment in the design of data centers were
investigated   using
     The effects       an experimentally
                   of using                 validated CFD
                             partial aisle containment      model.
                                                         in the      In general,
                                                                design            good agreement
                                                                         of data centers             was found
                                                                                          were investigated   in
between
this studysimulations    and experimental
             using an experimentally         values. Hard
                                          validated        and raised
                                                     CFD model.         floor configurations
                                                                    In general,  good agreementwith either open
                                                                                                    was found
or partially
between       containedand
          simulations     aisles  were compared
                              experimental   values.with
                                                     Hardrespect to airflow
                                                           and raised   floor management.
                                                                              configurationsThe   setups
                                                                                               with eitherbased
                                                                                                           open
on
or partially contained aisles were compared with respect to airflow management. The setupsexceeded
   the conditions    in the existing data center were  very well cooled   since the supply  flow rate  based on
the flow rate demanded
the conditions                by the
                 in the existing  dataserver
                                       centerracks, and well
                                              were very  the values
                                                              cooled of  RTIthe
                                                                      since   were  relatively
                                                                                supply         low,
                                                                                        flow rate    about 40%
                                                                                                  exceeded   the
and  50%   for the  hard  and  raised  floor configurations,  respectively.  Hence,   the indices indicate
flow rate required by the server racks, and the values of RTI were relatively low, about 40% and 50% for    that
the servers are cooled and maintained within the thermal guidelines but the energy performance is
poor. Therefore, the same setups with only 50% of the original supply flow rate were also
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                   16 of 17



the hard and raised floor configurations, respectively. Hence, the indices indicate that the servers are
cooled and maintained within the thermal guidelines but the energy performance is poor. Therefore,
the same setups with only 50% of the original supply flow rate were also investigated. The supply
flow rate was then approximately the same as the flow rate through the server racks. Reducing the
supply flow rate gave more apparent hotspots and the values of RTI were raised to over 80% in all
setups, but the same tendencies as in the setups with 100% supply flow rate were found.
      Based on the combination of performance metrics where both rack intake temperatures and
airflow patterns were taken into account, the airflow management was significantly improved in the
raised floor configurations. For the hard floor configurations, there were hotspots close to the end of
the rows. The side cover reduced the extent of these. However, using the top cover reinforced the hot
air recirculation around the rows which declined the performance of the cooling system. For the raised
floor configurations, partially contained aisles were preferred compared with open aisles, and the side
cover performed better than the top cover, especially in the case of decreased flow rate.
      In addition to hot spots at the end of the rows, potential hot spots were observed especially in the
vicinity of the areas of high server load, hence individual supply flow rates between computer room
air handling (CRAH) units should be further investigated.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, E.W., A.-L.L. and T.S.L.; methodology, E.W.; software, E.W.; validation,
E.W., A.-L.L.; formal analysis, E.W., A.-L.L., T.S.L.; data curation, E.W.; writing—original draft preparation,
E.W.; writing—review and editing, A.-L.L., T.S.L.; visualization, E.W.; supervision, T.S.L., A.-L.L.; project
administration, A.-L.L.
Funding: The research was funded by the Celtic-Plus project SENDATE-EXTEND and the Swedish Energy Agency.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge RISE SICS North for providing data and facilities for
the experiments.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Ni, J.; Bai, X. A review of air conditioning energy performance in data centers. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev.
      2017, 67, 625–640. [CrossRef]
2.    Van Heddeghem, W.; Lambert, S.; Lannoo, B.; Colle, D.; Pickavet, M.; Demeester, P. Trends in worldwide ICT
      electricity consumption from 2007 to 2012. Comput. Commun. 2014, 50, 64–76. [CrossRef]
3.    Patankar, S.V. Airflow and Cooling in a Data Center. J. Heat Transf. 2010, 132, 073001. [CrossRef]
4.    Song, Z.; Zhang, X.; Eriksson, C. Data Center Energy and Cost Saving Evaluation. Energy Procedia 2015, 75,
      1255–1260. [CrossRef]
5.    ASHRAE. Thermal Guidelines for Data Processing Environments—Expanded Data Center Classes and Usage
      Guidance; American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc.: Atlanda, GA,
      USA, 2011.
6.    Tatchell-Evans, M.; Kapur, N.; Summers, J.; Thompson, H.; Oldham, D. An experimental and theoretical
      investigation of the extent of bypass air within data centres employing aisle containment, and its impact on
      power consumption. Appl. Energy 2017, 186, 457–469. [CrossRef]
7.    Wibron, E.; Ljung, A.-L.; Lundstrom, T.S. Comparison of hard floor and raised floor cooling of servers with
      regards to local effects. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics
      Society (IECON 2018), Washington, DC, USA, 21–23 October 2018.
8.    Srinarayana, N.; Fakhim, B.; Behnia, M.; Armfield, S.W. Thermal Performance of an Air-Cooled Data Center
      with Raised-Floor and Non-Raised-Floor Configuration. Heat Transf. Eng. 2013, 35, 384–397. [CrossRef]
9.    Arghode, V.K.; Sundaralingam, V.; Joshi, Y.; Phelps, W. Thermal Characteristics of Open and Contained Data
      Center Cold Aisle. J. Heat Transf. 2013, 135. [CrossRef]
10.   Sundaralingam, V.; Arghode, V.K.; Joshi, Y.; Phelps, W. Experimental Characterization of Various Cold Aisle
      Containment Configurations for Data Centers. J. Electron. Packag. 2015, 137, 011007. [CrossRef]
11.   Alkharabsheh, S.A.; Sammakia, B.G.; Skrivastava, S.K. Experimentally Validated Computational Fluid
      Dynamics Model for a Data Center with Cold Aisle Containment. J. Electron. Packag. 2015, 137, 021010.
      [CrossRef]
Energies 2019, 12, 1473                                                                                         17 of 17



12.   Nada, S.A.; Said, M.A.; Rady, M.A. CFD investigations of data centers’ thermal performance for different
      configurations of CRACs units and aisles separation. Alex. Eng. J. 2016, 55, 959–971. [CrossRef]
13.   Chu, W.-X.; Wang, C.-C. A review on airflow management in data centers. Appl. Energy 2019, 240, 84–119.
      [CrossRef]
14.   Lu, H.; Zhang, Z.; Yang, L. A review on airflow distribution and management in data center. Energy Build.
      2018, 179, 264–277. [CrossRef]
15.   Wibron, E.; Ljung, A.-L.; Lundstrom, T.S. Computational Fluid Dynamics Modeling and Validating
      Experiments of Airflow in a Data Center. Energies 2018, 11, 644. [CrossRef]
16.   Sjölund, J.; Vesterlund, M.; Delbosc, N.; Khan, A.; Summers, J. Validated Thermal Air Management Simulations
      of Data Centers Using Remote Graphics Processing Units. In Proceedings of the IECON 2018—44th Annual
      Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Washington, DC, USA, 21–23 October 2018.
17.   Simonazzi, E.; Ramos Galrinho, M.; Varagnolo, D.; Gustafsson, J.; Garcia-Gabin, W. Detecting and
      Modelling Air Flow Overprovisioning/Underprovisioning in Air-Cooled Datacenters. In Proceedings
      of the IECON 2018—44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Washington, DC,
      USA, 21–23 October 2018.
18.   Gustafsson, J.; Fredriksson, S.; Nilsson-Mäki, M.; Olsson, D.; Summers, J. A demonstration of monitoring and
      measuring data centers for energy efficiency using opensource tools. In Proceedings of the IECON 2018—44th
      Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, Washington, DC, USA, 21–23 October 2018.
19.   Zhai, J.Z.; Hermansen, K.A.; Al-Saadi, A. The Development of Simplified Boundary Conditions for Numerical
      Data Center Models. Ashrae Trans. 2012, 118, 436–449.
20.   Arghode, V.K.; Kang, T.; Joshi, Y.; Phelps, W.; Michaels, M. Measurement of Air Flow Rate through Perforated
      Floor Tiles in a Raised Floor Data Center. J. Electron. Packag. 2017, 139, 011007. [CrossRef]
21.   Abdelmaksoud, W.A.; Khalifa, H.E.; Dang, T.Q.; Elhadidi, B.; Schmidt, R.R.; Iyengar, M. Experimental and
      Computational Study of Perforated Floor Tile in Data Centers. In Proceedings of the 12th Lntersociety
      Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (THERM), Las Vegas, NV,
      USA, 2–5 June 2010; pp. 1–10.
22.   Roache, P.J. Perspective: A Method for Uniform Reporting of Grid Refinement Studies. J. Fluids Eng. 1994,
      116, 405–413. [CrossRef]
23.   Celik, I.B.; Ghia, U.; Roache, P.J.; Freitas, C.J.; Coleman, H.; Raad, P.E. Procedure for Estimation and Reporting
      of Uncertainty Due to Discretization in CFD Applications. J. Fluids Eng. 2008, 130. [CrossRef]
24.   Abdelmaksoud, W.A.; Khalifa, H.E.; Dang, T.Q. Improved CFD modeling of a small data center test cell.
      In Proceedings of the 12th Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in
      Electronic Systems (THERM), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2–5 June 2010; pp. 1–9.
25.   Herrlin, M.K. Rack Cooling Effectiveness in Data Centers and Telecom Central Offices: The Rack Cooling
      Index (RCI). Ashrae Trans. 2005, 111, 725–731.
26.   Chu, W.-H.; Hsu, C.-S.; Tsui, Y.-Y.; Wang, C.-C. Experimental investigation on thermal management for small
      container data center. J. Build. Eng. 2019, 21, 317–327. [CrossRef]
27.   Herrlin, M.K. Airflow and Cooling Performance of Data Centers: Two Performance Metrics. Ashrae Trans.
      2008, 114, 182–187.
28.   VanGlider, J.W.; Shrivastava, S.K. Capture Index: An Airflow-Based Rack Cooling Performance Metric.
      Ashrae Trans. 2007, 113, 126–136.

                          © 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                          article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                          (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
