Data-Driven Optimization Approach for Inverse Problems :
Application to Turbulent Mixed-Convection Flows
M. Oulghelou1 , C. Beghein2 , C. Allery3
LaSIE, UMR-7356-CNRS, Université de La Rochelle Pôle Science et Technologie, Avenue Michel
Crépeau, 17042 La Rochelle Cedex 1, France.

arXiv:2009.06724v2 [cs.CE] 24 Sep 2020

Abstract
Optimal control of turbulent mixed-convection flows has attracted considerable attention
from researchers. Numerical algorithms such as Genetic Algorithms (GAs) are powerful
tools that allow to perform global optimization. These algorithms are particularly of great
interest in complex optimization problems where cost functionals may lack smoothness and
regularity. In turbulent flow optimization, the hybridization of GA with high fidelity Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is extremely demanding in terms of computational time and
memory storage. Thus, alternative approaches aiming to alleviate these requirements are of
great interest. Nowadays, data driven approaches gained attention due to their potential in
predicting flow solutions based only on preexisting data. In the present paper, we propose
a near-real time data-driven genetic algorithm (DDGA) for inverse parameter identification
problems involving turbulent flows. In this optimization framework, the parametrized flow
data are used in their reduced form obtained by the POD (Proper Orthogonal Decomposition) and solutions prediction is made by interpolating the temporal and the spatial POD
subspaces through a recently developed Riemannian barycentric interpolation. The validation of the proposed optimization approach is carried out in the parameter identification
problem of the turbulent mixed-convection flow in a cavity. The objective is to determine
the inflow temperature and inflow velocity corresponding to a given temperature distribution in a restricted area of the spatial domain. The results show that the proposed genetic
programming optimization framework is able to deliver good approximations of the optimal
solutions within less than two minutes.
Keywords: Flow inverse problem, optimal control, Data-Driven optimization, indoor
flows, heat problems, Genetic Algorithm, Proper Orthogonal Decomposition.

1 mourad.oulghelou@univ-lr.fr
2 cbeghein@univ-lr.fr
3 cyrille.allery@univ-lr.fr

1. Introduction
Decreasing energy consumption of buildings is an important aspect of the reducing of
global warming. However, the energy reduction has to be compromised with the quality of
thermal comfort inside buildings. To achieve that, optimization applied to indoor airflows,
which is aimed at determining optimal flow values for some well chosen parameters are of
great interest. The optimization objective can be expressed in the whole or a part of the
domain, in terms of field variables such as inlet velocity, wall temperature, heat source,
etc. For flows in buildings, which are mostly mixed convection turbulent flows, high fidelity solvers are privileged for parameter identification problems. A usual class of flow
optimization algorithms consists in standard gradient descent algorithms using high fidelity
adjoint equations. The search direction is computed as the functional cost sensitivity over
the design variables and the solution is moved along until an optimal solution is reached.
This approach was used for instance by Liu et al. to find optimal thermo-fluid boundary
conditions in a two-dimensional cavity [1] and to optimize the air supply location, size, and
parameters in a two dimensional non isothermal ventilated cavity [2]. It was also used to
optimize buoyancy-driven ventilation flows governed by Boussinesq equations [3, 4]. A major limitation of high fidelity adjoint-based algorithms is that they are more likely to stuck
in local optima. To overcome this issue, a global optimization search can be carried out by
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) [5]. In the context of mixed-convection flows, high fidelity solvers
combined with GA have been investigated and validated in [6, 7]. Compared to high fidelity
adjoint based optimization approach, high fidelity based GA is more efficient in terms of
finding global optimal solutions, yet it requires a tremendous computing load, leading to
turn the attention to techniques of model reduction.
Reduced-order models have been extensively used in fluid dynamics in order to reduce the
computational burden in optimization and control applications. Recently, POD/Galerkin
reduced order models were successfully combined with optimization approaches allowing a
drastic alleviation of the optimization computational effort. A standard approach developed by Tallet et al. [8] and Bergmann et al. [9] consists in using high fidelity simulations
to extract a POD basis representing the main structures of a set of snapshots sampled at
different parameter values. The temporal dynamics is afterwards calculated by solving an
ordinary system of differential equations resulting from Galerkin projection of the governing
equations onto the global POD basis. By considering the global POD/Galerkin ROM as
the state equations, a reduced scale optimization problem can be formulated and solved
in near-real time. However, in many physical cases, the global POD/Galerkin ROM may
experience issues of accuracy due to the overload of information in the global POD basis.
Sophisticated subspace interpolation techniques such as the ITSGM (Interpolation on the
Tangent Space of the Grassmann Manifold) proposed by Amsallem et al. [10] is an efficient
local method meant to restrict the ROM predictions to the wanted physical regime. In the
context of the adjoint-based optimal control, the ITSGM/Galerkin ROM was successfully
embedded in a suboptimal control strategy to achieve a near-real time optimal control of
transfer phenomena [11].
In the last two decades, interest in data driven model reduction techniques for flow problems
is increasingly growing. Interestingly, the power of these methods is their dispense on the
underlying mathematical model. Instead, they explore and learn the dynamics from preexisting data and deliver approximations that are expected to capture most of the dynamics
of the flow. Numerous attempts have been carried out in this subject. Namely, one can
refer to [12] where a modified version of the ITSGM referred to as Bi-CITSGM designed for
non-linear data interpolation is proposed, and to [13, 14, 15, 16, 17] where Artificial Neural
Networks (ANN) were used with model reduction for the prediction of flow solutions. In
the context of data driven optimization, the Bi-CITSGM has been used successfully in conjunction with GA to control the flow past a circular cylinder and the flow in a lid driven
cavity [12]. In the same spirit, ANN are used in conjunction with micro genetic algorithm

2

(MGAs) for the optimization of the location of multiple discrete heat sources in a ventilated
cavity [18]. In both cases, the Bi-ITSGM or ANN combined with GA demonstrated their
ability to reach good suboptimal solutions within a near-real computational time.
In this paper, we formulate a new Data Driven Genetic Algorithm (DDGA) based on the
Riemannian Barycentric interpolation of subspaces. This interpolation method is based
upon the geometry of the manifold of fixed rank matrices studied in details in [19]. It was
initially used to interpolate low-rank solutions of the Luyapunov equations resulting from
parametric linear input-output reduced order system [20], and recently adapted to interpolate the parametric Navier-Stokes Galerkin/ROM [21]. In contrast to the Bi-CITSGM which
needs a calibration phase for the interpolated POD subspaces, the barycentric interpolation
naturally results in modes that are arranged according the POD energetic content. This
property allows to interpolate the time and space quantities separately and eventually form
the set of untrained solutions by simply combining them. The aim of the following study
is to use a preexisting flow database to solve the inverse parameter identification problem
involving the turbulent mixed-convection flow in a cavity. The optimization objective is to
determine the inlet velocity and temperature that optimize the cost functional related to
maintaining a desired temperature distribution inside a part of the spatial domain.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: First, the studied Mixed convection
inverse problem is presented in section 2. In section 3, the barycentric interpolation used
for nonlinear parametrized data prediction is detailed. Next, the proposed data driven Genetic Algorithm is outlined in section 4. In section 5, numerical experiments assessing the
potential of this approach are carried out on the inverse problem involving the turbulent
mixed-convection flow in a cavity. Finally, conclusions are drawn in section 6.
2. Mixed convection inverse problem
2.1. Optimization problem settings
This study focuses on the inverse problem of temperature distribution in a two-dimensional
ventilated cavity, whose dimensions are 1.04m × 1.04m, and which is shown in figure 1. The
temperature θhot of the bottom wall of the cavity is higher than the temperature θcold of
the other walls:
θhot = 35o C and θcold = 15o C
(1)
The air inlet (resp. outlet) is located at the top left (resp. bottom right) corner of the

Figure 1: Description of the studied mixed-convection flow

cavity. The vertical dimension of the air inlet (resp. outlet) is 0.018 m (resp. 0.024 m). At
the inlet, the air velocity is denoted U , and the air temperature is θ. The turbulent air flow
in the cavity is governed by the equations of mass conservation, momentum conservation,

3

energy conservation, of an incompressible Newtonian fluid with Boussinesq’s assumption


∇ · v = 0
(2)
ρ∂t v + ρv · ∇v = −∇p + µ∆v + ρ g β(Θ − Θ0 )ey + ∇σt


ρ cp ∂t Θ + ρ cp v · ∇Θ = λ ∆Θ + ∇qt
where v, Θ, p are the time averaged velocity4 , temperature and pressure obtained with an
Unsteady Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (URANS) turbulence model. ρ, µ, Cp , λ are the
density, dynamic viscosity, heat capacity and heat conductivity of the fluid at the reference
temperature Θ0 , g is the gravitational acceleration, β is the thermal expansion coefficient.
σt and qt are the turbulent Reynolds stress and the turbulent heat flux given by
σtij = −ρ vi0 vj0

qti = −ρ cp vi0 Θ0

where v 0 and Θ0 stand for the temporal mean values of the fluctuating velocity and temperature. The aim of the following study is to solve the constrained nonlinear optimization
problem
min J (y)
subject to
N (y, δ) = 0
(3)
δ

where J is the functional describing the cost to minimize, N the non-isothermal NavierStokes equations (2) and y(δ) the state variable which might be represented for example
by the velocity field v or the temperature Θ. In the present article, since the turbulent
mixed-convection flow is strongly influenced by the inlet temperature θ and velocity U , we
use them as optimization variables. For a given temperature distribution Θ̂, the goal is to
recover the inlet velocity U and inlet temperature θ that minimize the objective functional
Z tf Z
J (Θ) =
(Θ − Θ̂)2 dx dt
(4)
0

Ωint

where [0, tf ] is the time frame of simulation and Ωint the restricted occupied zone of the
spatial domain depicted in figure 1. Two cases of optimization are studied. The first case
consists in maintaining the inlet temperature θ constant and considering the optimization
variable to be the inlet velocity δ = U ; and the second case by fixing the inlet velocity U
and optimizing on the inlet temperature δ = θ. It is worth mentioning that one could also
think about optimizing on different parameters, such as the coordinates or the intensity of
a heat source in the domain Ω. But, since a GA strategy is to be used, these parameters
can directly be incorporated into the cost functional without inducing any modification in
the optimization process.
2.2. Standard GA approach
The general idea of GA is illustrated in the flowchart 2. GA consists in starting from a
randomly generated set (of size Nchrom ) of chromosomes δ1 , δ2 , . . . , δNchrom , forming a population. The size of populations is unchanged and fixed to Nchrom . In each population, a
fitness value [22] is assigned to each chromosome δj . Virtually, any fitness function can be
chosen given that no requirement for continuity in the derivatives is needed. Some examples
of the choice of fitness functions can be found in [23, 24, 25, 26]. In the present paper, the
fitness function f is chosen as the inverse of the objective function, i.e, the fitness of the j th
chromosome is calculated as follows
1
f (yj ) =
J (yj , δj )
where yj is obtained by solving the constraint problem N (yj , δj ) = 0. In order to evolve
populations, three main genetic operators [27] modeled on the Darwinian concepts of natural
selection and evolution are used. These are :
4 In these equations, v, Θ and p should have been written v, Θ and p. To alleviate the notations in the
reminder of the paper, the time averaged notation will not be used.

4

Figure 2: Outline of the Genetic Algorithm.

Selection. There are several methods for selecting the best chromosomes and their transfer
to the next generation. In general, a new population of chromosomes is chosen to survive
based on their fitness values. That means that a chromosome δj with a large fitness value
has higher probability of being reproduced and passed down into the next generation. The
probability of reproduction can be calculated as follows
Psj = f (yj )

,N
chrom
X

f (yi )

i=1

Using this reproduction probability, Nchrom solutions from the current generation are selected
by the roulette rule [28] to survive for the next generation. These reproduced solutions are
afterwards modulated by the crossover and mutation operators [27] .
Crossover. The crossover is the operation wherein genes are exchanged between two chromosomes. In particular, all the surviving chromosomes by the roulette selection rule are
randomly paired. Precisely, two individuals are randomly selected as parent individuals,
then arbitrary positions on both individuals are chosen for crossing locations where exchange of genes takes place. In practice, a random number ranging from 0 to 1 is generated.
If the random number is greater than Pc , the two chromosomes in the original pair remain
into the next generation. Otherwise, the crossover takes place, and two new chromosomes
are created to replace the parent chromosomes.
Mutation. The mutation operator is responsible for bringing new information to the population. With a probability Pm ranging from 0 to 1, the mutation operator accidentally
changes one of the resulted genes.
The above genetic operations are repeated for a predetermined number of generations arbitrarily set by the user. The best chromosome of the final generation is declared as the
global optimized solution. Despite their superiority with respect to other optimization approaches, a serious weakness of high fidelity based GAs is their considerable requirements
in computational effort and memory storage [29]. In fact, GA needs to perform high fidelity simulations many times for each evolved population (iteration). With the increase
in the number of generations, the populations and their required crossovers and mutations

5

will increase. These, in turn increase the time complexity of GA, making unfeasible their
application in near-real time. In order to tackle this issue, an interpolation strategy suited
for non-linear parameterized data and intended to replace the high fidelity solver in the GA
is proposed in the next section.
3. Barycentric interpolation for nonlinear parametrized data
3.1. Data compression strategy by using the POD
Consider a set of parametrized matrices {Y k ∈ RNx ×Ns , k = 1, . . . , Np } formed from the
discrete solutions5 y(δk ) of a transient non-linear flow problem. i.e,


y(t1 , x1 , δk ) y(t2 , x1 , δk )






.
.
..
..
Yk = 





y(t1 , xNx , δk )
y(tNs , xNx , δk )
In practice, δ refers to a parameter of the flow problem, Nx the number of spatial degrees
of freedom and Ns the number of time steps, where it is assumed that Nx exceeds Ns by
several orders of magnitude. The aim of the following is to extract a set of reduced matrices
Yk that describes the dynamics of the full order matrices Y k . To this end, assume that each
matrix Y k is approximated in a POD basis 6 of dimension q as follows
Y k ≈ Φk Λk T

(5)

where Φi ∈ RNx ×q and Λi ∈ RNs ×q are respectively the spatial and temporal bases. Now,
consider the POD respectively of orders r and s, r, s ≤ qNp , of the column block matrices




Φ1 Φ2 · · · ΦNp = ΦϕT
Λ1 Λ2 · · · ΛNp = ΛαT
and
where Φ ∈ RNx ×r , ϕ ∈ RqNp ×r , Λ ∈ RNs ×s , α ∈ RqNp ×s . Let ϕi ∈ Rq×r and αi ∈ Rq×s ,
i = 1, . . . , Np , be the column block matrices of ϕT and αT such as




ϕT = ϕ1 ϕ2 · · · ϕNp
and αT = α1 α2 · · · αNp
It yields that the full order snapshots matrix associated to the parameter δk can be written
as
Y k ≈ Φϕk αkT ΛT
(6)
It is important to note that in the above expression, the change with respect to parameter δk
occurs only on the nested matrices Yk = ϕk βkT of significantly reduced size r × s, r, s  Nx .
In parametric studies such as optimization, rather than using the full order matrices Y k , it
is more convenient to manipulate the corresponding nested reduced matrices Yk in order to
achieve low cost calculations. The interpolation strategy of the matrices Yk is detailed in
the next subsection.
5 In our case, the solutions y correspond to the turbulent mixed convection temperature distribution Θ,
and the parameter δ to the inlet velocity U or inlet temperature θ.
6 The POD bases are constructed such that they verify optimality with respect to the Euclidean inner
product. In this case, the POD is nothing but the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD). However, other
inner products such as L2 or H 1 can be used. More details about the POD approach can be found in [30].

6

3.2. Data interpolation
In the following, the interpolation approach is first presented for two data samples. The
generalization to an arbitrary number of data samples is given afterwards. Let Y1 and Y2
be two parametrized compressed matrices associated respectively to δ1 and δ2 , such that
Y1 = ϕ1 α1T

Y2 = ϕ2 α2T

where ϕk and αk are rank-q parameterized matrices resulted from the data compression
procedure. By using the above representations, the goal is to predict the matrix Ỹ associated to a new parameter value δ̃ different from δ1 and δ2 . To this end, the barycentric
interpolation proposed in [21] for subspaces interpolation is used. For the sake of simplicity,
we restrict ourselves to the univariate case and use Lagrange functions to generate interpolation weights. The Lagrange functions constructed by using two points δ1 and δ2 are given
by
δ̃ − δ1
δ̃ − δ2
ω2 (δ̃) =
ω1 (δ̃) =
δ1 − δ2
δ2 − δ1
During the interpolation process, two sorts of subspaces have to be distinguished. The spatial subspaces span(ϕ1 ) and span(ϕ2 ), and the temporal subspaces span(α1 ) and span(α2 ).
The proposed data interpolation technique suggests to predict the new matrix Ỹ by applying
the barycentric interpolation strategy to the spatial and temporal subspaces separately, i.e,
it consists in solving the fixed point problems


Find ϕ̃ such that :


 T
SVD
SVD
ϕ̃ ϕ1 = ξ1 Σ1 η1T and ϕ̃T ϕ2 = ξ2 Σ2 η2T
(Px )


δ̃ − δ1
δ̃ − δ2

ϕ̃ =
ϕ1 Q̃1 +
ϕ2 Q̃2 where Q̃1 = η1 ξ1T and Q̃2 = η2 ξ2T
δ1 − δ2
δ2 − δ1

(Pt )



Find α̃ such that :


 T
SVD
SVD
α̃1 α1 = ζ1 Υ1 τ1T and α̃T α2 = ζ2 Υ2 τ2T


δ̃ − δ1
δ̃ − δ2

α̃ =
α1 K̃1 +
α2 K̃2 where K̃1 = τ1 ζ1T
δ1 − δ2
δ2 − δ1

and K̃2 = τ2 ζ2T

The iterative process to solve the problem (Px ) is described by the following fixed point
sequence
 (0)
ϕ̃ given, for n ≥ 0



T
SVD (n) (n) (n)T

(n)
(n) (n)T

then set Q̃1 = η1 ξ1
Perform the SVD of ϕ̃(n) ϕ1 = ξ1 Σ1 η1
T
SVD (n) (n) (n)T
(n)
(n) (n)T
(Px )
Perform the SVD of ϕ̃(n) ϕ2 = ξ2 Σ2 η2
then set Q̃2 = η2 ξ2





Update the interpolant as ϕ̃(n+1) = δ̃ − δ2 ϕ1 Q̃(n) + δ̃ − δ1 ϕ2 Q̃(n)
1
2
δ1 − δ2
δ2 − δ1
The same strategy applies for the resolution of problem (Pt ). Now, once the solutions ϕ̃ and
α̃ respectively, of the fixed points problems (Px ) and (Pt ) are found, the reduced snapshot
matrix Ỹ can be formed as
!2
!2
δ̃ − δ2
δ̃ − δ1
T
T T
Ỹ = ϕ̃ α̃ =
ϕ1 Q̃1 K̃1 α1 +
ϕ2 Q̃2 K̃2T α2T
δ1 − δ2
δ2 − δ1

(δ̃ − δ1 )(δ2 − δ̃) 
T T
T T
+
ϕ
Q̃
K̃
α
+
ϕ
Q̃
K̃
α
1 1 2 2
2 2 1 1
(δ1 − δ2 )2
A very interesting property of the above formula is that even though space and time reduced
bases {ϕ1 , ϕ2 } and {α1 , α2 } are separately interpolated, the calibration between the columns
7

of ϕ̃ and α̃ is naturally ensured by the barycentric interpolation, unlike the Bi-CITSGM
[12] where the calibration is lost by the Grassmannian interpolation.
Let’s now state the general framework of the data interpolation approach. To do so, consider a set of parametrized data matrices Y1 , · · · , YNp associated to the parameter values
δ1 , δ2 , . . . , δNp , such that
Yk = ϕk αkT , k = 1 . . . , Np
The approximate matrix Ỹ for a new untrained value δ̃ 6= δk obtained by solving the following
fixed point problems


Find ϕ̃ such that :
Find α̃ such that :








SVD
T
ϕ̃T ϕ SVD

k = 1, . . . , Np
α̃T αk = ζk Υk τkT k = 1, . . . , Np
k = ξk Σk ηk ,
(Px )
(P
)
t
Np
Np
X
X




T
ϕ̃ =



ω
(
δ̃)
ϕ
Q̃
where
Q̃
=
η
ξ
α̃
=
κk (δ̃) αk K̃k where K̃k = τk ζkT
k
k k
k
k k


k=1

k=1

The solution is then constructed as follows
Ỹ =

Np
X

ωk (δ̃) κh (δ̃) ϕk Q̃k K̃hT αhT

k,h=1

where Q̃k and K̃h are orthogonal matrices and ωk and κh are some interpolation functions
of sum equal to 1, verifying ωk (δi ) = κk (δi ) = δ ki , with δ ki the piecewise Kronecker delta
function which value is 1 if k equals i and 0 otherwise. The interpolation procedure of
nonlinear parametrized data is summarized in algorithm 1.
In order to tackle the severe computational effort of Genetic algorithms, an optimization
procedure is proposed in the next section, where algorithm 1 is used as solution predictor
instead of the high fidelity solver.
Algorithm 1: Non-linear data interpolation strategy
Offline :
Use the POD to compress the trained parametrized data matrices Y k such as
Y k ≈ ΦYk ΛT

where

Yk = ϕk αkT

Online :
Give a value of δ̃ (chosen by the user) and calculate the weights ωk (δ̃) and κh (δ̃)
T
(0)
Set Ỹ (0) = ϕ̃k α˜k (0) arbitrary, for example choose a point Yk from the sampling
while Error > ε do
for k ∈ {1, . . . , Np } do
(n)

Calculate the matrix Q̃k

(n)

Calculate the matrix K̃k

(n) (n)T

= ηk ξk

T

(n) (n)

= τk ζk

Update the reduced matrix : Ỹ (n+1) =

T

SVD

(n)

(n) (n)T

T

SVD

(n)

(n) (n)T

where ϕ̃(n) ϕk = ξk Σk ηk

where α̃(n) αk = ζk Υk τk

Np
X

(n)

(n)T

ωk (δ̃) κh (δ̃) ϕk Q̃k K̃h

αhT

k,h=1

Evaluate the error : Error =

Np Np
X
X

(n)

(n)T

||Q̃k K̃h

k=1h=1

denotes the Frobenius norm.

8

(n−1)

− Q̃k

(n−1)T

K̃h

||F where || · ||

4. Data-Driven Reduced Genetic Algorithm
Basically, the proposed DDGA is a genetic algorithm strategy to solve inverse problems
by means of available precomputed parametrized flow data. The major advantage of this
approach is that the relationship between the state variable y and the optimization variable
δ, earlier established through the mapping N , is now replaced by the cheap explicit formula
of the barycentric interpolation
y(tl , xj , δ̃) ≈ Φ(xj )ỸΛT (tl )

(7)

where Φ(xj ) and Λ(tl ) denote respectively the j th and lth rows of the matrices Φ and Λ,
and Ỹ the reduced snapshots matrix to be found by algorithm 1.
In order to make sure that DDGA performs in an optimal manner, the chromosomes are
enriched by virtual genes. These genes are the order of POD truncation q and the number of
spatial and temporal interpolation neighbors denoted respectively nex and net . To illustrate
this, let Y1 , . . . , Y4 be four reduced matrices associated to the parameter values δ1 < δ2 <
δ3 < δ4 respectively such that
Yk = ϕk αkT ,

k = 1, . . . , 4

where ϕk and αk are rank-q matrices. Suppose that we want to find an approximation of
the reduced matrix Ỹ for an untrained value δ̃ ∈]δ1 , δ2 [ by using an order of POD truncation
m < q, three neighbors for spatial interpolation (nex = 3) and two neighbors for temporal
interpolation (net = 2). Then the untrained reduced matrix is approximated as
Ỹ =

3 X
2
X

ωk (δ̃) κh (δ̃) ϕk Q̃k K̃hT βhT

k=1h=1

where the columns of ϕk and βh are truncated up to the order m and
ωk (δ̃) =

3
Y
δ̃ − δi

δ − δi
i=1 k

and

κh (δ̃) =

2
Y
δ̃ − δi

δ − δi
i=1 h
i6=h

i6=k

In the proposed genetic algorithm strategy, the j th chromosome is then the candidate
δ̄j = {δj , net , nex , m} where δj , net , nex and q are its genes. Accordingly, the original
optimization problem (3) is modified yielding to
min J (Ỹ, δ̄)

such that Ỹ is the output of algorithm 1

δ̄

In the next section, the potential of this approach is assessed on the inverse parameter
identification problem involving a turbulent mixed convection flow.
5. Numerical experiments
In this section, the CFD model used to solve the mixed-convection problem is first
validated with respect to the benchmark experimental data. Then a set of solutions sampled
in different time instants and different trained parameters are created and eventually used
to assess the efficiency of the proposed DDGA.
5.1. CFD validation
This series of numerical computations was based on the experiment carried out by Blay
et al. [31], where a turbulent mixed convection flow was generated in a ventilated cavity
with dimensions 1.04 × 1.04 × 0.7 m3 . In this experiment, a two-dimensional flow was
generated in the enclosure shown in figure 1, which was surrounded by two guard cavities.
9

The reference temperature Θ0 was the average temperature in the cavity. The Rayleigh
number of this configuration, based on the cavity height and on the temperature difference
between the heated floor (θhot = 35.5o C) and the other walls and the inlet (θcold = θ =
15o C), was 2.13 × 109 . The Reynolds number based on the air velocity at inlet U =
0.57m/s and on the inlet height was 654. The two-dimensional turbulent flow was modeled
with the RNG k-epsilon model [32]. To compute this flow, and to generate all input data
necessary for the study presented in this paper, the finite volume code OpenFOAM [33] was
used. The computational domain was discretized into a non uniform grid made of 120000
hexaedral cells, which was very tight close to the walls, in order to properly discretize the
boundary layer. The non-isothermal flow described by equations (2) was calculated with
the buoyantBoussinesqPimpleFoam solver. At the inlet, the velocity boundary conditions
were u = 0.57 m/s and v = 0 m/s, the temperature was Θ = 15o C, and the turbulent
boundary conditions were k = 1.25 × 10−3 m2 /s2 and  = 5.76 × 10−3 m2 /s3 . On the walls,
no-slip boundary conditions were applied for the velocity components, the temperature was
equal to 35o C on the floor, and to 15o C on the other walls. At the outlet, zero gradient
boundary conditions were applied for the temperature, the velocity components and the
turbulent variables. The steady flow presented in this paragraph was reached by computing
an unsteady flow, starting at t = 0 s from Θini = θcold for the temperature, and uini =
vini = 0 for the velocity components. The convection terms were discretized with the Gauss
linear Upwind scheme, and the laplacian terms were approximated with the Gauss linear
corrected scheme. With this non uniform mesh, the average y + value was equal to 1.1,
and the maximum value was 3.3. In figure 3, the temperature profiles at x = 0.52 and at
Θ−Θ0
∗
∗
y = 0.52 are shown such that, Θ∗ = θhot
−θcold , x = x/H and y = y/H where H is the
cavity height. A satisfactory agreement can be noticed.

(a) Θ∗ at x∗ = 0.5

(b) Θ∗ at x∗ = 0.5

Figure 3: Comparison between the numerical results (CFD) and the experimental results (Exp Blay et al.)
of Θ∗ at x∗ = 0.5 (a) and y ∗ = 0.5 (b)

5.2. Optimization problem of the mixed convection flow
As claimed in the earlier section, a data driven approach (algorithm 1) is to be embedded
within the GA in order to tackle the severe computational effort due to high fidelity simulations. Thereby, the time required for evaluating the fitness of one chromosome passes from
several hours to real time, and thus, drastically reducing the time needed for optimization.
By using a set of parametrized flow solutions, the goal is to act on the inlet velocity or
temperature in order to minimize the discrete cost functional
N

J (Θ) =

s
1 X
Ns n=1

Z
Ωint

10

(Θn − Θ̂n )2 dx

(8)

where the interior subdomain represented in figure 1 is considered such that Ωint = [0.1, 0.9]×
[0.15, 0.7]. The superscript n refers to the time instant, Θn the calculated temperature and
Θ̂n the target temperature.
A set of training simulations, based on the configuration presented in figure 1, for different
values of inlet velocity U and inlet temperature θ were performed with OpenFOAM over the
time interval [0, tf ]. For all the cases considered in this paper, at t = 0 s, the temperature
in the cavity is equal to θcold , and the velocity to 0. The final time instant tf was chosen
in such a way that the temporal evolution of the temperature in the center of the cavity
did not vary according to time. For all simulations, tf = 1250 s was a sufficiently long
time interval. 1000 snapshots uniformly spaced in the time interval [0, tf ] are then used to
build the temperature POD decompositions, where the maximal POD truncation order q is
initially set to 60. Two series of tests are carried out :
Test Series 1 : the optimization is performed by fixing the inlet temperature θ = 15◦ C and
varying the inlet velocity U . The following three values of U are considered for the training
phase : 0.51m/s, 0.627m/s and 0.798m/s. Knowing the temperature Θ̂ in the subdomain
Ωint , the aim is to determine by applying DDGA, the corresponding inlet velocity Û with
values : 0.54m/s, 0.57m/s, 0.5985m/s, 0.67m/s, 0.7125m/s and 0.755m/s. Recall that
besides the inlet velocity U , the space of search by DDGA is enriched by the order of truncation of the POD decompositions m, and the number of temporal and spatial neighboring
subspaces net and nex , selected to perform the barycentric interpolation. For this case, the
DDGA is allowed to search in the following space

K = (U, net , nex , m) ∈ R+ × N3 , 0.51 ≤ U ≤ 0.798; 2 ≤ net , nex ≤ 3 and 4 ≤ m ≤ q
In order to analyze the performance of the method proposed in this paper, it is interesting
to have a look at the isovalues of temperature and velocity magnitude in the cavity for the
three training values of inlet velocity (see figures 4). At the beginning of all simulations
presented in this paper, the air in the vicinity of the hot floor is warmed by thermal diffusion,
and it is then lifted by natural convection along the hot floor (one can notice small thermal
plumes at the beginning of all simulations). For an inlet velocity between 0.51 and 0.798
m/s, and an inlet temperature value of 15o C, a clockwise recirculation region is generated
by the combined effects of the forced convection induced by the air injection, and of the
natural convection which occurs along the hot floor.
Test Series 2 : in this case, the optimization is performed by acting on the inlet temperature
θ while the inlet velocity is set to the fixed value 0.57m/s. The considered training injection
temperature values are : 5◦ C, 10◦ C, 15◦ C, 20◦ C and 25◦ C. As in test series 1, the aim is
to use DDGA to approximate the optimal inlet temperature θ̂ with values : 7.5◦ C, 12.5◦ C,
17.5◦ C and 22.5◦ C associated to the known temperature distribution Θ̂. The space of search
by DDGA in this case is given by

K = (θ, net , nex , m) ∈ R+ × N3 , 5 ≤ θ ≤ 25; 2 ≤ net , nex ≤ 5 and 4 ≤ m ≤ q
For this test series, let us have a look at the isovalues of temperature and velocity magnitude
obtained for the inlet temperatures of 5o C, 15o C and 25o C (see figures 5). For small
inlet temperatures (θ = 5o C), the air in the upper left part of the cavity, which is too
cold, falls along the left wall. It is then warmed by the hot floor, and lifted by natural
convection with a counterclockwise motion along the hot floor. For higher inlet temperatures
(θ = 15o C), the air in the upper part of the cavity is warm and the clockwise motion of a large
recirculation region induced by the combined effects of the forced convection phenomenon
and the natural convection phenomenon along the hot floor can be seen. For the highest
temperature velocities (θ = 25o C), the injected air is hot, it remains in a large region along
the ceiling, it falls along the left and right cold walls, and is lifted along the heated floor,
inducing two recirculation regions, a clockwise one in the right part of the cavity, and a
coutnterclockwise one in the left part of the cavity. For this second series of training tests,
11

it can be concluded that for various inlet velocities, the flow regimes are different from each
other.
In the numerical experiments of DDGA, a population of 20 chromosomes formed by 4 genes
randomly generated in K is used as initial guess to run the DDGA. The algorithm is allowed
to run until a maximum number of iterations predetermined by the user is reached. The
maximum number of iterations here is set to 30.

Figure 4: Temperature distribution at three time instants t = 8.75s (left), t = 55s (middle) and t = 1250s
(right) for the case of variable inlet temperature

5.3. Temperature optimization by the proposed Data-driven Genetic Algorithm
In the following, the results of the inverse parameter identification problem involving
the turbulent mixed convection flow are presented and analyzed. The decay of the averaged
functional for the cases of variable inlet temperature and variable inlet velocity is plotted in
figure 6. It shows that after successive generations, the averaged cost decreases and tends
to stagnate, meaning that the populations contain a chromosome of high recurrence. This
chromosome is eventually considered as the best individual that approximates the sought
optimum of the inverse problem. The outputs of this best chromosome from the last generation are listed in Table 1 and Table 2. It can be seen that the DDGA succeeded to recover
approximations Ũ and θ̃ of the sought optimal inlet values Û and θ̂ with good accuracies.
Moreover, The L2 percentage of error over the simulation time interval between the target
temperature and the solution obtained by DDGA for all the cases was less than 0.8% (see
figure 7). Figures 8 and 9 show the target temperature solutions side by side with the reconstructed temperature solutions obtained at the end of DDGA. The odd columns show the
first appearance of the thermal plumes that emerge from the heated bottom wall of the cavity, while the even columns represent the temperature distribution in its established regime.
From a visual perspective, it can be seen that the approached solutions by DDGA are in

12

Figure 5: Temperature distribution at three time instants t = 8.75s (left), t = 55s (middle) and t = 1250s
(right) for the case of variable inlet velocity.

good agreement with the target high fidelity solutions. The converged DDGA-solution succeeded to track the provided target temperature catching by that the most of the dynamics
features present in the temperature along the simulation time interval and all over the domain Ω. More particularly, for the first test series which led to similar features but different
values of velocity and temperature, the velocity and temperature values in the cavity are
properly recovered by the method proposed in this paper. It can also be pointed out that
for the second test series which involved various flow regimes and which was much more
complex than the first case, the new method presented here provided results that showed
a good accuracy. Here, the attention of the reader is bounced back to the fact that the
POD truncation order m as well as the neighbors number net and nex , are extremely important parameters of DDGA. These parameters are essentially meant to ensure the good
performance of the barycentric interpolation inside the DDGA. By analyzing the results
of tables 1 and 2, we observe that these quantities vary from a test case to another, i.e,
variable neighbors number with less than 12 modes were needed to represent the DDGAoptimal flow for the case of inlet velocity, while the case of variable inlet temperature has
more complicated dynamics and needed at least 25 modes to represent the solution. This
confirms that besides the ability to locate a global optimum of the inlet problem, the DDGA
has the feature to eliminate the noise that might intervene from further data samples and
from lower frequency POD modes. Finally, in terms of computational effort, DDGA is very
efficient and performs in near-real time. The overall computational time needed to perform
30 generations in a single cluster was less than two minutes. In inverse problems of turbulent
flows, this represents a tremendous gain in CPU time compared to traditionally used high
fidelity approaches.

13

Figure 6: Evolution of the averaged functional over generations of DDGA for the cases of variable inlet
velocity and variable inlet temperature.

Figure 7: Percentage of error of the converged temperature solution by DDGA.

Sought optimal values
Û = 0.54
Û = 0.57
Û = 0.5985
Û = 0.67
Û = 0.7125
Û = 0.755

Approximated value
Ũ = 0.544
Ũ = 0.578
Ũ = 0.59
Ũ = 0.66
Ũ = 0.706
Ũ = 0.755

net
2
2
2
3
2
3

nex
2
2
2
3
3
3

trunc. order m
8
10
10
10
7
12

Table 1: Outputs of the optimal control by using DDGA for the case of variable inlet velocity.

Sought optimal values
θ̂ = 7.50
θ̂ = 12.5
θ̂ = 17.5
θ̂ = 22.5

Approximated value
θ̃ = 7.92
θ̃ = 12.10
θ̃ = 17.85
θ̃ = 22.50

net
4
2
2
3

nex
4
2
2
4

trunc. order m
25
31
38
30

Table 2: Outputs of the optimal control by using DDGA for the case of variable inlet temperature.

14

Figure 8: Comparison of the high fidelity and DDGA temperature solutions at two different instants of the
flow, for the case of variable inlet velocity. The odd columns describe the first appearance of thermal plumes
at t = 8.75s, and the even columns the established regime of the temperature at t = 1250s.

6. Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed the data driven optimization approach DDGA by combining genetic algorithms and the barycentric interpolation. The barycentric interpolation
is presented here as an equation-free approach that allows to learn from trained data solutions and predict the evolution of new untrained solutions without any knowledge of the
physics hidden behind. The numerical assessments of DDGA are performed on the inverse
problem involving a turbulent mixed convection problem, where the variation is carried out
on the inlet velocity and then on the inlet temperature. We notice that DDGA succeeded
to track the optimal solutions and to deliver satisfying approximations in less than two
minutes. This significant gain endorses the great potential of this approach compared to a
high fidelity based GA that could last for many hours or days.
Acknowledgement
This material is based upon work financially supported by CPER BATIMENT DURABLE
- Axe 3 ”Qualité des Environnement Intérieurs (QEI)” (P-2017-BAFE-102) and French
Astrid ANR MODULO’PI (ANR-16-ASTR-0018 MODUL’O Π).

References
References
[1] W. Liu and Q. Chen, “Optimal air distribution design in enclosed spaces using an
adjoint method,” Inverse Problems in Science and Engineering, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 760–
779, 2015.
[2] W. Liu, M. Jin, C. Chen, and Q. Chen, “Optimization of air supply location, size,
and parameters in enclosed environments using a computational fluid dynamics-based
adjoint method,” Journal of Building Performance Simulation, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 149–
161, 2016.
[3] S. Nabi, P. Grover, and C. Caulfield, “Adjoint-based optimization of displacement
ventilation flow,” Building and Environment, vol. 124, pp. 342 – 356, 2017.
15

Figure 9: Comparison of the high fidelity and DDGA temperature solutions at two different instants of the
flow, for the case of variable inlet temperature. The odd columns describe the first appearance of thermal
plumes at t = 8.75s, and the even columns the established regime of temperature at t = 1250s.

16

[4] S. Nabi, P. Grover, and C. Caulfield, “Nonlinear optimal control strategies for
buoyancy-driven flows in the built environment,” Computers & Fluids, vol. 194,
p. 104313, 2019.
[5] J. H. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems. Ann Arbor, MI: University
of Michigan Press, 1975. second edition, 1992.
[6] Y. Xue, Z. J. Zhai, and Q. Chen, “Inverse prediction and optimization of flow control
conditions for confined spaces using a CFD-based genetic algorithm,” Building and
Environment, vol. 64, pp. 77 – 84, 2013.
[7] T. Dias and L. F. Milanez, “Optimal location of heat sources on a vertical wall with natural convection through genetic algorithms,” International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer, vol. 49, no. 13, pp. 2090 – 2096, 2006.
[8] A. Tallet, C. Allery, and C. Leblond, “Optimal flow control using a POD based
Reduced-Order Model,” Numerical Heat Transfer, Part B, vol. 170, 2016.
[9] M. Bergmann, L. Cordier, and J.-P. Brancher, “Optimal rotary control of the cylinder
wake using proper orthogonal decomposition reduced-order model,” Physics of Fluids,
vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 97–101, 2005.
[10] D. Amsallem and C. Farhat, “An interpolation method for adapting reduced-order
models and application to aeroelasticity,” AIAA Journal, pp. 1803–1813, 2008.
[11] M. Oulghelou and C. Allery, “A fast and robust sub-optimal control approach using
reduced order model adaptation techniques,” Applied Mathematics and Computation,
vol. 333, pp. 416 – 434, 2018.
[12] M. Oulghelou and C. Allery, “Non-intrusive reduced genetic algorithm for near-real
time flow optimal control,” International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids,
https://doi.org/10.1002/fld.4820, 2020.
[13] M. Cheng, F. Fang, C. Pain, and I. Navon, “Data-driven modelling of nonlinear spatiotemporal fluid flows using a deep convolutional generative adversarial network,” Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, vol. 365, 2020.
[14] D. Xiao, C. Heaney, L. Mottet, F. Fang, W. Lin, I. Navon, Y. Guo, O. Matar, A. Robins,
and C. Pain, “A reduced order model for turbulent flows in the urban environment using
machine learning,” Building and Environment, vol. 148, pp. 323–337, 2019.
[15] O. San, R. Maulik, and M. Ahmed, “An artificial neural network framework for reduced order modeling of transient flows,” Communications in Nonlinear Science and
Numerical Simulation, vol. 77, pp. 271–287, 2019.
[16] J. Yu, C. Yan, and M. Guo, “Non-intrusive reduced-order modeling for fluid problems:
A brief review,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part G: Journal
of Aerospace Engineering, vol. 233, no. 16, pp. 5896–5912, 2019.
[17] S. Ahmed, S. Rahman, O. San, A. Rasheed, and I. Navon, “Memory embedded nonintrusive reduced order modeling of non-ergodic flows,” Physics of Fluids, vol. 31,
no. 12, 2019.
[18] R. R. Madadi and C. Balaji, “Optimization of the location of multiple discrete heat
sources in a ventilated cavity using artificial neural networks and micro genetic algorithm,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 2299 –
2312, 2008.

17

[19] E. Massart, P.-Y. Gousenbourger, N. Son, T. Stykel, and P.-A. Absil, “Interpolation
on the manifold of fixed-rank positive-semidefinite matrices for parametric model order
reduction: preliminary results,” 08 2019.
[20] E. Massart and P.-A. Absil, “Quotient geometry with simple geodesics for the manifold
of fixed-rank positive-semidefinite matrices,” SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and
Applications, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 171–198, 2020.
[21] M. Oulghelou and C. Allery, “A Riemannian barycentric interpolation : Derivation of
the parametric unsteady navier-stokes reduced order model,” arXiv:2009.11231, 2020.
[22] V. Kozeny, “Genetic algorithms for credit scoring: Alternative fitness function performance comparison,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 2998 – 3004,
2015.
[23] S. T. Selvi, S. Baskar, and S. Rajasekar, “Chapter 17 - application of evolutionary
algorithm for multiobjective transformer design optimization,” in Classical and Recent Aspects of Power System Optimization (A. F. Zobaa, S. H. A. Aleem, and A. Y.
Abdelaziz, eds.), pp. 463 – 504, Academic Press, 2018.
[24] J. S. Arora, “Chapter 17 - nature-inspired search methods,” in Introduction to Optimum
Design (Fourth Edition) (J. S. Arora, ed.), pp. 739 – 769, Boston: Academic Press,
fourth edition ed., 2017.
[25] S. Ali, H. Lu, S. Wang, T. Yue, and M. Zhang, “Chapter two - uncertainty-wise testing
of cyber-physical systems,” vol. 107 of Advances in Computers, pp. 23 – 94, Elsevier,
2017.
[26] B. V. Kumar, G. Karpagam, and Y. Zhao, “Chapter 9 - evolutionary algorithm with
memetic search capability for optic disc localization in retinal fundus images,” in Intelligent Data Analysis for Biomedical Applications (D. J. Hemanth, D. Gupta, and V. E.
Balas, eds.), Intelligent Data-Centric Systems, pp. 191 – 207, Academic Press, 2019.
[27] K. Khoo and P. Suganthan, “Evaluation of genetic operators and solution representations for shape recognition by genetic algorithms,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 23,
no. 13, pp. 1589 – 1597, 2002.
[28] D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning.
Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1st ed., 1989.
[29] X. Yang, Z. Yang, G. hua Lu, and J. Li, “A gray-encoded, hybrid-accelerated, genetic algorithm for global optimizations in dynamical systems,” Communications in
Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 355 – 363, 2005.
[30] L. Sirovich, “Turbulence and the dynamics of coherent structures : Part I, II and III,”
Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, pp. 461–590, 1987.
[31] D. Blay, S. Mergui, and C. Niculae, “Confined turbulent mixed convection in the presence of a horizontal buoyant wall jet,” ASME Heat Transfer Division, vol. 213, pp. 65–
72, 1992.
[32] V. Yakhot, V. Orszag, S. Thangam, T. B. Gatski, and C. G. Speziale, “Development of
turbulence models for shear flows by a double expansion technique,” Physics of Fluids
A: Fluid Dynamics, vol. 4, no. 7, pp. 1510–1520, 1992.
[33] OpenFOAM. https://openfoam.org, 2017.

18

