Constraining Genetic Symbolic Regression via
Semantic Backpropagation
Maximilian Reissmann1*, Yuan Fang1 , Andrew S. H. Ooi1 ,
Richard D. Sandberg1

arXiv:2409.07369v2 [math.OC] 17 Nov 2024

1* Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Melbourne,

Grattan Street, Melbourne, 3010, Victoria, Australia.

*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s):
reissmannm@student.unimelb.edu.au;
Contributing authors: yuanfang1@student.unimelb.edu.au;
a.ooi@unimelb.edu.au; richard.sandberg@unimelb.edu.au;
Abstract
Evolutionary symbolic regression approaches are powerful tools that can approximate an explicit mapping between input features and observation for various
problems. However, ensuring that explored expressions maintain consistency with
domain-specific constraints remains a crucial challenge. While neural networks
are able to employ additional information like conservation laws to achieve more
appropriate and robust approximations, the potential remains unrealized within
genetic algorithms. This disparity is rooted in the inherent discrete randomness of
recombining and mutating to generate new mapping expressions, making it challenging to maintain and preserve inferred constraints or restrictions in the course
of the exploration. To address this limitation, we propose an approach centered on
semantic backpropagation incorporated into the Gene Expression Programming
(GEP), which integrates domain-specific properties in a vector representation as
corrective feedback during the evolutionary process. By creating backward rules
akin to algorithmic differentiation and leveraging pre-computed subsolutions, the
mechanism allows the enforcement of any constraint within an expression tree by
determining the misalignment and propagating desired changes back. To illustrate the effectiveness of constraining GEP through semantic backpropagation,
we take the constraint of physical dimension as an example. This framework is
applied to discover physical equations from the Feynman lectures. Results have
shown not only an increased likelihood of recovering the original equation but
also notable robustness in the presence of noisy data.

1

Keywords: Gene Expression Programming, Semantic Backpropagation, Symbolic
regression

1 Introduction
The ability to track, store, and access vast amounts of data, in conjunction with
the advent of an increasing landscape of machine learning algorithms, has emerged
as a promising avenue to scientific discovery [1], engineering design [2], or biomedical research [3]. Here, regression approaches not only offer the opportunity to explore
underlying patterns but also yield the potential to elaborate data-driven models for
enabling promising prediction capabilities. However, a majority of existing methods
often fail to achieve generalizability for out-of-training-distribution scenarios or struggle to capture underlying principles that govern natural phenomena when attempting
to map the observations [4]. These issues become even more critical when the number of features increases, implying a vast amount of possibilities to construct such a
model, extending the development time and the model uncertainty.
Strategies such as regularization and constraint-based approaches have been
developed to address the generalization gap and narrow the search space. Notably,
techniques relying on neural networks are more accessible for advanced regularization due to their internal continuous weight representation and their differentiation
mechanism [5, 6]. While these approaches have gained significant traction, there have
been only a few attempts within the field of evolutionary computation. Nevertheless,
evolutionary approaches, such as Genetic Programming (GP)[7] or Gene Expression
Programming (GEP) [8], can handle non-smooth optimization problems and navigate
high-dimensional, non-convex error surfaces, making them very versatile and applicable on a wide range of diverse problems. Here, strategies mitigating the effect of an
increasing search space can be pointed to methods enforcing constraints [9], such as
strict typing [10] or grammar-based construction [11, 12], exist. More recently, success was achieved by employing regularization utilizing domain-specific properties to
modify the loss function [13, 14].
Still, regularization alone has key limitations, e.g., requiring case-dependent manual tuning of regularization parameters [15] and potentially extending exploration
time by suppressing promising candidate solutions in early iterations [13]. On the
other hand, methods like strongly typed [16] or grammar-guided [17] GP necessitate
substantial modifications to genetic operators [18] while suffering from low population diversity due to the initialization procedure [19]. Moreover, these approaches
demonstrate weaker performance compared to other methods [20].
Strategies aiming to infer sub-solutions with a more heuristic approach, such as
semantic backpropagation [21], exist but are currently only featuring as a search
operator on the regression target.
To address this shortcoming, we propose integrating semantic backpropagation
within GEP. The study introduces a methodology for formulating and employing constraints derived from the relationship between inputs and outputs, mapped into a

2

continuous space. Based on that formulation, a metric and the backpropagation mechanism can be utilized to infer the desired changes within the candidate solution. A case
study by enforcing dimensional homogeneity of physical units is provided to exemplify
the formulation of constraints and the application of backpropagation. By conducting
a commonly utilized benchmark for symbolic regression (SRBench [20]) that, in comparison to other approaches, we demonstrate the framework’s capability to enforce and
maintain a constraint, limiting the number of possible combinations and, therefore,
restricting the search space.
The study begins with a brief overview of related work. In section 3, we describe the
methodology of incorporating physical knowledge, explaining the details of the synergy
between the semantic backpropagation and the physical constraints, as well as the
details of the algorithmic integration. Thereafter, section 4 presents the experimental
setup, the employed metrics, and the test scenarios performed, followed by a discussion
of the results. The last section concludes this work and outlines future work.

2 Related Work
This section starts by defining the relevant terminology and further examines the
current state of symbolic regression methodologies, focusing on evolutionary methods.
Subsequently, we outline methodologies that incorporate domain-specific knowledge
into optimization processes.

2.1 Symbolic Regression
Assuming a regression task is given through a data set consisting of input features
{x0 , . . . , xn } = X and a target value y, where we seek to find a mapping function
fˆ so that fˆ(X) ≈ y. Employing symbolic regression restricts the model formulation
fˆ to be an algebraic equation composed of various functions gk from a pre-defined
function space Ω, combining a subset of X and various floating-point numbers or
constants. Compared to regression methods relying on neural network architectures,
the symbolic ones emphasize their advantage according to interpretability and better
generalizability [4].
However, these methods come with their challenges, as the problem of identifying
an appropriate matching function has been proven to be NP-Hard (nondeterministic
polynomial time) [22]. This implies that assuming P ̸= N P , whereby P signifies the
problems solvable in polynomial time, no algorithm exists to solve all instances in
polynomial time of this problem.
Currently, the field of symbolic regression is still primarily dominated by metaheuristic approaches like genetic algorithms [7, 23–30]. Here, the direction for the
optimization finds its role model within biological evolution. A randomly initialized
start population, representing a set of different equations, is optimized over many
generations. An assessment based on an error metric takes place in each generation,
preceding the application of various modifications of the candidate solutions. Building
upon Koza’s research [7], subsequent studies have implemented different techniques to
enhance the efficiency of the exploration. These include specialized encoding schemes,
predefined assumptions, more effective genetic search operators [21, 31], and strategies
3

for parallel processing and optimized hardware utilization [32]. Despite these improvements, the poor scaling to larger problems, low search efficiency, and unpredictable
convergence remain significant issues [33].
Techniques developed in recent years, like the equation learner (EQL) [34] and the
Deep Symbolic Regression (DSR) Framework [35], aim to improve the search efficiency
and suggest a more systematic procedure by using a neural network, hence driving
the exploration through gradient information. The previously mentioned approach
integrates mathematical operators into a classical neural network forward pass and
employs gradient descent. In contrast, DSR utilizes reinforcement learning, a riskseeking policy, to refine the prediction of a more appropriate equation. Notably, while
first-order optimization methods demonstrate proficiency in local search regions, they
might end up with a sub-optimal solution. In further studies, this challenge has motivated the development of hybrid methods using the properties of meta-heuristics as
well as the guided feedback from a gradient, for instance, the neural guided genetic
programming [36] or the reinforcement GEP[8].
Yet, the problem of excessive convergence time due to the large number of iterations
required to infer a sufficient solution that fits the data remains. Here, the advent
of large language models shifts the focus from an intensive search process to the
training of parameter-intensive neural networks. Particularly, approaches like [33, 37–
40] demonstrate that learning a large sample set of equations with their corresponding
input- and output spaces allows a close inference, at least for the spatial dimension
that has been seen during the training. Furthermore, they also try to approximate
numerical constants using a second-order optimization. For example, the End-to-End
Symbolic regression proposed by Kamienny et al. [33] demonstrated on the Feynman
data set included within the SRBench [20] that for reaching a comparable result of the
R2 -score, the inference time is around 100 times smaller compared to the evolutionary
GP-Gomea [29]. Nevertheless, these approaches become less accurate in the next token
prediction when the feature space increases, necessitating enhanced decoding methods
[41], which also increases the risk of an extended exploration time and results in
further considerations on mitigating or restricting the search space. Moreover, recent
transformer-based approaches for symbolic regression face limitations, mainly when
dealing with out-of-distribution datasets [41].

2.2 Consideration of a Dimensional Constraint
In case X is recorded by observing a physical system, each feature xi represents a
physical quantity having a dimension ϕi . For instance, when attempting to determine
a velocity, a feature x1 might represent a distance with dimension ϕ1 = [m] (meters)
while another feature x2 could be time, having dimension ϕ2 = [s] (seconds). Hence, the
target can be derived as the composition of ϕ1 and ϕ2 signifying velocity (v = x1 /x2 )
with dimension [m/s]. This extends the initial given target for fˆ(X) ≈ y, to also satisfy
dimensional homogeneity ϕf = ϕy . Imposing such an additional constraint reduces the
number of valid combinations between functions and features, implying a restriction
on the search space. In the subsequent study, we refer to a candidate solution as
invalid if ϕf ̸= ϕy . A common first step in analyzing a data set involves techniques like
normalization or non-dimensionalization of each feature. This process standardizes the
4

range of the quantities within the data set and ensures that the contributions to the
final result are comparable. Regardless, in a significant portion of scientific equations,
the input features are assigned physical dimensions, representing real-world quantities.
The dimensions provide insight into how the quantities are linked to the given solution.
However, most of the aforementioned approaches emphasize minimizing a numerical
loss between the prediction of the generated function and the target values or trying
to achieve a less complex equation regarding the function composition. With this
idea in mind, some approaches started incorporating the homogeneity of the physical
dimensions as a constraint to restrict the feature space and enable a more consistent
representation of possible solutions.
The study of Udrescu and Tegmark [42] and the subsequent enhanced version
[43] describes a framework, referred to as AI Feynman, where the dimensional analysis marks the initial step. A mechanism determines new variables before proceeding
to subsequent stages, ensuring a proper scaling of the physical quantities (nondimensionalization). In a further study, Bakarji et al. [44] proposed three methods, all
relying on the Buckingham-Pi theorem [45] - a principle utilized in engineering science
facilitating the identification of appropriate combinations of considered quantities for
non-dimensionalization. Before employing Brunton et al.’s proposed approach [1], the
author implemented the dimensions as a constraint on the optimization, specifically
as a bias prescribing the construction of the first layer of a neural network (BuckiNet).
Tenachi et al. [46] extended the DSR approach [35] to a physical, symbolic optimization to take the physical dimensions of the data set into account. Here, the constraint
is given upfront and acts in the way of a grammar-guided construction rule during the
sampling. The authors demonstrate that this improves the rate of finding the baseline
solution by approximately a factor of three compared to the original DSR. Particularly
in the field of evolutionary methods, Matcheva et al. [47] demonstrated that initial
restrictions through a dimensional analysis provide robust analytical models. Grundner et al. [14] incorporate the information about dimensionalized quantities utilizing
an implementation referred to as PySR [25] to extract more coherent and robust models within the domain of astrophysics. Within that implementation, the dimensional
consistency is enforced by adding a penalty on top of the regression loss. Further
examples, particularly utilizing GEP, are proposed by [13] and [48] conducting function approximation within the domain of fluid mechanics. While the first proposed
method by Bleh et al. [13] discards invalid solutions, reducing the exploration capabilities, Ma et al. [48] expands the search until the best expression meets the dimensional
homogeneity, which further increases the time.
These observations from the literature strongly support the assumption that
dimensional information can guide the exploration of metaheuristics and lead to more
precise and robust approximations. Consequently, our approach seeks to establish
dimensional homogeneity through a heuristic correction. To the authors’ knowledge,
no prior study has specifically explored the application of semantic backpropagation to physical constraints, and in particular physical dimensions, nor its effects on
exploratory processes. Furthermore, the concept has not been adapted to the methodology of the GEP to date. Therefore, we integrate semantic backpropagation into GEP
to enforce the physical unit constraints during the generation of physical equations.

5

The performance of this proposed algorithm will be compared to other approaches
mentioned above.

3 Methodology
This section starts with a brief overview of the GEP approach and the applied genetic
operators. While alternative evolutionary methods exist, GEP was chosen for its efficient handling of complex expressions through genotype-phenotype separation, and
due to more robust performance compared to GP [49, 50]. By pointing out changes
in the underlying representation of the expression (genotype) caused by modifications
through the evolutionary process, we can identify issues that need to be addressed
to take constraints into account without restricting the exploration capability. Subsequently, we introduce a representation, providing a continuous description of feature
properties. This representation is derived from the concrete example involving physical
dimensions, enabling the application of a distance metric. The last part of the section
introduces the concept of semantic backpropagation and proposes the algorithmic
changes incorporated into the evolutionary method.

3.1 Preliminaries
The methodology of the GEP can be depicted as a particular variant of Genetic Programming [28, 51], whereby the most significant adjustment is characterized through a
decoupling of the geno- and phenotype. Here, the former consists of a linear sequence
with a fixed size (2n+1). The sequence follows the construction rule such that the first
n-positions, known as the head, may contain both terminal (x1 , x2 , ..) and non-terminal
symbols (+, −, ×, ...), while the remaining n+1, the tail, exclusively includes terminals.
We construct the phenotype as an expression tree by decoding the sequence from left
to right. For instance, with a head length of two and a genotype of [×, ×, 1, q, E], the
phenotype can be determined as illustrated in Fig. 1 a.), whereby the part responsible
for constructing the expression is also anointed as Karva expression (K-expression).
The K-expression, a linear string, serves as an intermediate representation that bridges
the genotype and phenotype, containing only the active symbols that contribute to
the expression tree’s construction. This linear structure and the decoding mechanism
facilitate tracing and the capability of systematic manipulation of the genetic material while preserving structural integrity, which is fundamental to our methodological
approach. An overview of the entities employed in the GEP is provided in the appendix
(A); for additional details, the reader is referred to [28]. The optimization is performed
by assessing samples of randomly generated expressions (population) and evolving
their genotypes by applying different canonical genetic operators, including mutation
or crossover. This procedure is repeated over many iterations (generations) until a
stop criterion is met.
While the static definition of the sequence ensures algebraic validity for the usage
of the terminals and non-terminals, it does not take into account the other consistency
requirements, like the example of the physical dimensional homogeneity. Furthermore,
the genetic operators not only facilitate exploration, but they also carry the risk
of eliminating viable sub-solutions [51], affecting an underlying system that tries to
6

a.)

E

x

1

b.)

x

x

E

+

q

1

q

Fig. 1 Expression tree built up in pre-order presenting the impact of a mutation operation (indicated
by the dashed line), altering the expression from the tree given in a.) to the one represented in b.).
Here, the equation sought represents the description of the electric force, given the electric field (E)
and the electric charge (q). Integrating the physical dimension into the evaluation, the resulting tree,
particularly the operation 1 + q, leads to a violation.

achieve consistency. Referring to the previous example [×, ×, 1, q, E] and assigning the
corresponding physical dimension to each symbol, the evaluation of the tree in Fig. 1
a.) yields a correct solution. In detail, E represents the electrical field through [V/m]
(Volt per meter), q the electric charge given in [C] (Coulomb) and the value one is
dimensionless. Here, the application of the mutation operator leads to a tree with
the structure depicted in Fig. 1 b.), which does not align with the expected physical
quantity and may be rejected by a constraint despite being possibly close to a ground
truth solution. Furthermore, by applying the full range of genetic operators proposed
by Fereirra [28], the probability of such violations would increase.

3.2 Structural Homogeneity
While the majority of regression techniques often focus on a loss value [28–30, 33, 37,
40, 41], pointing to the numerical magnitude produced by the mathematical model,
formulas, and procedures from areas such as physics [52], chemistry [53] or biology
[54] suggest that the structural validity of a model can provide crucial insights. This
structure, grounded in scientific principles, not only allows the derivation of the proportion for the contribution of possible input features but also imposes constraints on
the possible configurations of the solution. To leverage the information, a mapping is
required, satisfying properties such as order and continuity to employ a distance metric, which is able to guide the exploration. Here, a link to a more general approach
can be developed by utilizing some key concepts of the expression tree and abstracting it as a graph G = (V, E) (connected graph without cycles) [55], where V defines a
set of vertices, also referred to as nodes, connected by the edges E. To further specify certain properties, techniques such as graph neural networks [56] assign particular
features represented as a continuous feature vector akin to [53, 54]. Through defined
functions corresponding to the transitional properties of the nodes, the feature vectors can be aggregated. Subsequently, an error metric can be employed to determine
the distance between the output and an expected value. Minimizing that discrepancy
necessitates a change within the graph. Since we define a constraint, such as the feature vectors are constant according to the source nodes, the change directly affects a
node or a segment.

7

a)
[kg]

1

0

[m]

0

1

[s]

0

0

[A]

0

0

0

0 0
+
0 0 0
+
-3 0 0
+
0 0 -1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

b)
0
+
0

0

0

0

1

0

0

+
c)
1

1

-2 0

0

Fig. 2 Representation and composition of different physical dimensions based on the basis units.
Here, a.) depicts the dimension of the electrical field E and b.) the electrical charge q. The employed
operation on the two quantities results in a force, which can be described by the composition in c.).

Throughout various domains, such a feature vector can be developed, for instance,
representing the orbital states of the valence configuration when dealing with chemical reactions [53] or language model extracted protein sequences within a biomedical
area [54]. For the example investigated within this study, we demonstrate the feature
mapping as well as the definition of the function utilized for the aggregation on the
physical dimension, particularly the international system of the physical basis units
(SI-unit System).
This approach provides a unique system for standardizing measurements and
making their values comparable across different domains [57]. It consists of seven fundamental units, each representing a specific physical dimension: mass (kilogram - [kg]),
length (meter - [m]), time (second - [s]), temperature (Kelvin - [K]), current (Ampere
- [A]), quantity (mole - [mol]), and luminous intensity (candela - [cd]). Their composition via mathematical operators leads to more complex representations of a physical
quantity. According to the application for existing optimization frameworks, packages
available can be found within the PySR implementation [25] or provided through SciPy
[58]. Similar to Bleh et al. [13], we utilize a system based on a vector representation.
This is not only due to its simplicity but also because it provides an essential part of
establishing a distance metric concerning the semantic backpropagation methodology.
As done in the software OpenFOAM [59], the information is projected into a one-hot
encoded vector with a length of seven, whereby each position corresponds to one of
these dimensions.
Based on that representation, more complex relations can be created by increasing
or decreasing the number at each position. Referring to the example given in Fig 1
a.), where Coulomb’s law is expressed as the product of the electric charge (q) and
the electric field (E), the dimension can be calculated as demonstrated in Fig. 2.
Subfigure a.) signifies the dimension for E. The operations for the dimensions related
to the multiplication of the features lead to the addition yielding the corresponding
unit ([kg · m · s−3 · A−1 ] =⇒ [V/m]). A comprehensive explanation of various SI-unit
8

Table 1 Physical dimension transformation rules for evaluating expression in both forward and
backward directions. ϕc represents the resulting physical dimension, while ϕa and ϕb mark the
inputs.
Operator

Forward
Rule

Backward
Rule

Comment

c=a+b

ϕc := ϕa = ϕb

c=a−b

ϕc := ϕa = ϕb

c=a∗b
c = a/b
n
c=a
√
c= a
c = sin(a); c = cos(a); ..

ϕc := ϕa + ϕb
ϕc := ϕa − ϕb
ϕc := n ∗ ϕa
ϕc := ϕa /2
ϕc := 0 ∗ ϕa

ϕa := ϕc
ϕb := ϕc
ϕa := ϕc
ϕb := ϕc
ref. appendix
ref. appendix
ϕa := ϕc /n
ϕa := 2 ∗ ϕc
ϕa := 0 ∗ ϕc

c = log(a); c = exp(a); ..

ϕc := 0 ∗ ϕa

ϕa := 0 ∗ ϕc

Entries of a and b needs to be
the same on every position
ref. ’+’ operation
the same on every position
Pointwise addition
Pointwise subtraction
Dimension is multiplied by n
Dimension is divided by two
Result becomes dimensionless
Input needs to be dimensionless
Result is dimensionless
Input needs to be dimensionless

compositions is provided in Appendix B. Subfigure b.) depicts the representation for q,
obtained from ([s·A] =⇒ [C]). Finally, Subfigure c.) illustrates how the mathematical
operation of the two quantities induces a force, which is represented by its physical
dimension ([kg · m · s−2 ] =⇒ [N]).
Given that the mathematical operator on the particular symbol does not satisfy
the evaluation of the physical dimensions, we define a set of rules for performing the
assessment. Here, Table 1 lists the transformation for the standard functions employed
within the utilized framework. The letters a and b signify two arbitrary physical
quantities with their corresponding [·] dimensional representation. Applying addition
or subtraction requires that both values correspond to the same physical dimension.
We can employ arithmetic functions as depicted in Table 1 for the additional operators.
Particularly, the forward operations are related to the evaluation path from the input
to the output, and the backward one describes the utilization from the output to the
inputs.

3.3 Semantic Backpropagation
As indicated in Fig. 1, the application of genetic operators needs to be encapsulated
within a mechanism that verifies dimensional homogeneity and corrects any detected
discrepancies. Besides those mentioned above and grammar-guided approaches like
[46, 60, 61], methods that take intermediate states and program semantics into account
exist. Here, semantic backpropagation, introduced by Pawlak et al. [21] and applied
to the field of genetic programming [29], provides a technique on how to manipulate
the expression according to a particular purpose, referred to the desired semantics.
Expressions are typically evaluated using a hierarchical computational graph depicted
as a tree, which can be decomposed into sub-trees fˆ(x) = fˆ2 (fˆ1 (x), x). Traversing
from the leaves upward, each node contributes an intermediate result, enabling the
tracing of the performed executions and relating them to the output. Sub-trees yielding
identical results demonstrate shared semantics, which can simplify expressions without
losing their semantic value. Moreover, semantic backpropagation assumes that the
9

0 1 0 0
? ? ? ?

b.)

/

1 1 0 0
1 1 0 0

+

+

1 1 0 0
1 1 0 0
a.)

m

1

m

1

r

1

m

2

1 0 0 0
? ? ? ?

c

0 0 0 0
0

m

r

2

2

c.)

1 0 0 0

Fig. 3 Expression tree built up in pre-order presenting an example approximation for exploring the
equation that calculates the center of gravity. The blue boxes illustrate the vector presentations of
the desired physical dimension, while the red boxes present the calculated units. Starting from a.)
and following the red arrows towards the output, the dimension can be evaluated. A misalignment
b.) initiates a process, propagating residual information to the underlying sub-trees (blue arrows),
where changes are enforced, here at c.).

desired semantics for a function fˆ can be achieved by retaining the structure of fˆ and
adapting iteratively the inner functions fˆ2 and fˆ1 through heuristic inversion [62]. A
lookup into a library can be performed at each node to determine whether the sub-tree
can be replaced by a composition meeting the desired semantics, similar to the rule
application for algorithmic differentiation [63]. The library can be established either
in advance, based on the features and a maximum tree height, or dynamically within
the course of the exploration.
Fig. 3 depicts an approximation fˆ close to the equation that calculates the center of
gravity depending on two different masses (m1 , m2 ) and their corresponding position
(r1 , r2 ). The desired semantics (ϕfˆ), here provided through the vector representation
of the physical dimension, are given with the problem that requires to be solved. While
the expected output ought to be a ‘length’, the evaluation by executing the forward
path (red arrows) leads to an invalid dimension (red box at b.)). Instead of discarding
the whole expression like in [13], that information, according to the misalignment, is
utilized to modify the expression. After quantifying the distance, the backpropagation
process is initiated (b.)). The first node encountered signifies a divide operator that
splits fˆ into fˆ1 and fˆ2 . In the subsequent layer, the intermediate states ϕfˆ1 and ϕfˆ2 are
analyzed along with the algebraic rules defined in Table 1, whereby backward signifies
the direction from the output to the input. As ϕfˆ2 is undefined, caused by a violation
of the desired constraint, here an underlying mismatch of the dimension, the residual
for further propagation is calculated by: −[?, ?, ?, ?, . . . ] = [0, 1, 0, 0 . . . ]−[1, 1, 0, 0, . . . ],
resulting in [1, 0, 0, 0, . . . ] as desired semantic for ϕfˆ2 . This procedure is repeated in the
subsequent subtree, where the misalignment can be pointed to the application of the
addition function to m0 ([1, 0, 0, 0, . . . ]) and an arbitrary constant c0 ([0, 0, 0, 0, . . . ]),
resulting in a substitution of an equivalent symbol. The example outlines the particular
algorithmic traits necessary to incorporate the concept into GEP. These mechanisms
encompass establishing a library containing different semantics, selecting an appropriate distance metric, identifying the genetic entity to which the corrections are applied,
and establishing rules to guide information propagation to subsequent branches:

10

1. Library of Semantics: The library can be described mathematically as a multiset partition (S) of the union of the terminal and the non-terminal symbol set,
where each element (Si ∈ S) satisfies defined conditions. These include that Si
can be transformed into a constant or an algebraic equation, yielding a valid physical dimension ϕ, and does meet the restriction according to the element count
(∀i ∈ {1, . . . , |S|}, |Si | ≤ head length), analogous to the maximum tree depth in
GP [21, 29]. Utilizing ϕ and |Si |, this can transform S into a hash table structure
whereby the key, defined by these quantities, is assigned to a list containing multisets (keyϕ,|Si | → fˆ0 , . . . , fˆi ). During the runtime, the substitution procedure fetches
an entry based on the key and randomly selects an entry from the obtained list.
2. Distance Metric: This measure indicates how close the semantics of fˆ and f are, and
it further provides a value to fetch the closest candidate from the library. Within
this study, the measure dϕ applied for determining the distance between two vector
representations ϕa and ϕb is given by the Euclidean distance (elementwise):
dϕ (ϕa , ϕb ) =


1X
(ϕa − ϕb )2 .
7

(1)

3. Adaptable entities: A core aspect of GEP’s internal mechanisms is that all genetic
operators are employed on the genotype representation only. To ensure dimensional
homogeneity through phenotype evaluation, changes inferred via semantic backpropagation are applied to the K-expression. The overall gene length constrains
the maximum length of any particular replacement. While GP relies on techniques
like ‘Random Disered Operator’ (RDO) or ‘Approximately Geometric Semantic
Crossover’ (AGX) [64], which randomly selects a node, the introduced operator
follows the expression tree in a systematic traversing order. Specifically, it determines the potential replacement of a sub-tree according to the desired semantics,
leveraging the existing database.
4. Backpropagation rules: Traversing through the expression, at each node, a decision is required on how to split the information to propagate further or enforce a
change based on a matching library entry. Here, some ideas derived from algorithmic differentiation are utilized [63]. Next to the standard forward execution, we
define a backward pass, enabling the capability to delegate residuals to the intermediate states. This residual contains a fraction of the backpropagated vector and
is calculated by a defined backward rule (ref. Table 1).
Due to the inherent nature of heuristic approaches, the correction process may
not achieve the expected dimensional homogeneity. This scenario could arise if, for
instance, the problem is not fully described in terms of the features, the library does
not contain a suitable candidate, or the parameter selected for the GEP is insufficient
to create an equation appropriate for the problem. Apart from an adjustment of the
hyperparameters, a regularization in the form of a loss penalty similar to [14, 44] or
the formulation of a further objective can be introduced to guide the exploration:



L̂(Y, X, fˆ) = L(Y, fˆ(X)) + λ · dϕ (ϕY , ϕfˆ(X) ) .

11

(2)

Here, L signifies an arbitrary loss function, fˆ an equation approximated by the GEP,
and the variable λ controls the magnitude of the penalty term, defining the magnitude
of how the dimensional homogeneity influences the search.
The subsequent algorithm (ref. 1) summarizes the detailed steps undertaken to
preserve dimensional homogeneity. Here, we utilize the pre-computed library (L) to
perform the correction for a population (P). The objective is to ensure that the
corrected candidates show a high probability of matching the physical dimension of
the target f , within a small tolerance ϵ. The ‘propagate change’ function recursively
attempts to correct sub-trees according to the inserted dimension. The function initializes by setting the homogeneity variable to false, indicating that the dimensional
consistency condition is not yet satisfied. This is followed by evaluating whether the
dimension of the inserted expression ϕg already satisfies the target dimension ϕt (Line
3 - Algorithm 1). If this condition is met, the function terminates and returns true,
bypassing subsequent ‘else’ branches. Otherwise, the algorithm proceeds by retrieving the left child node of g (gl ) and computing its corresponding target dimension
(ϕtl ) based on the arithmetic operation rule associated with g (Line 7 - Algorithm
1). When the dimension of (gl ) deviates from ϕtl , the algorithm attempts to fetch an
appropriate replacement from the library L (Line 12 - Algorithm 1) before propagating the dimensional correction to the underlying child nodes of (gl ). Upon reaching a
termination criterion for (gl ), the function applies an identical sequence of operations
to the right child node of g. To mitigate the disruptive effects of genetic operators
on dimensional homogeneity, the correction process is implemented before evaluation
takes place, using several attempts for the correction.

12

Algorithm 1 Perform Semantic Backpropagation for Dimensional Correction
Require: P, L
Ensure: dϕ (ϕfˆi , ϕf ) < ϵ, ∀fˆi ∈ P
1: function propagate change(g, ϕt )
2:
homogeneity ⇐ false
3:
if dϕ (ϕt , ϕg ) < ϵ then
4:
homogeneity ⇐ true
▷ Set true if dimensional homogeneity is satisfied
5:
else
6:
gl ⇐ get node lef t(g)
7:
ϕtl ⇐ rule(g)
▷ determine node target by rule - 1
8:
if dϕ (ϕtl , ϕgl ) < ϵ then
9:
homogeneity ⇐ true
▷ homogeneity for left node satisfied
10:
else
11:
if ϕtl ∈ L then
▷ Appropriate replacement in library?
12:
gl ⇐ get(L, ϕtl )
▷ retrieve replacement for node
13:
else
14:
homogeneity ⇐ propagate change(gl , ϕtl )
15:
end if
16:
end if
17:
gr ⇐ get node right(g)
18:
ϕtr ⇐ rule(g)
▷ determine node target by rule - 1
19:
if dϕ (ϕtr , ϕgr ) > ϵ then
20:
if ϕtr ∈ L then
21:
gr ⇐ get(L, ϕtr )
▷ retrieve replacement for node
22:
else
23:
homogeneity ⇐ propagate change(gr , ϕtr ) ∧ homogeneity
24:
end if
25:
end if
26:
end if
27:
return homogeneity
28: end function
29: for each fˆi ∈ P do
30:
gi ⇐ convert(fˆi )
▷ create the computational graph
31:
for each ∈ cycles do
▷ pre-defined number of cycles
32:
if propagate change(gi , ϕf ) then
33:
break
34:
end if
35:
end for
36: end for

13

4 Results and Discussion
In the subsequent section, we quantify and discuss the influence of dimensional homogeneity on the performance of genetic exploration. We provide a brief overview of the
employed benchmark, the adapted parametrization of the GEP implementation, and
the utilized error metrics. Subsequently, we first compare the influence of the proposed
extension on the GEP within a small test environment to evaluate its effects by focusing on error distribution and functional complexity. Here, the term small refers to a
limitation of epochs and the population size. In a subsequent consideration, we then
employ the configuration yielding the highest performance and compare it against different approaches from the literature using a more competitive amount of candidate
solutions and a larger population size. The hardware utilized was a 32-core server
(CPU-AMD-3.6GHz).

4.1 Benchmark
To evaluate the performance of the proposed extension, we utilize a benchmark for
symbolic regression established by La Cava et al. [20], referred to as SRBench. The
benchmark provides the results of various state-of-the-art methods such as GP-Gomea
[29], AI-Feynman, or the DSR approach conducted on different datasets. Table 2 lists
the approaches from the set. The repository comprises 252 datasets with equations
from the Feynman Symbolic Regression Database (Feynman Lectures on Physics
[52]), the Strogaz repository, and several real-world data sets outlined as Black-BoxProblems. The datasets are categorized into different difficulty levels, referred to as
‘easy,’ ‘medium’, or ‘hard’. Additionally, the SRBench suggests a set of rules and
metrics according to the comparability. The incorporated rules are an upper limit
of evaluations (106 ), the maximum time, the number of independent trials, and the
consideration of the train and test split for the particular cases. Following the benchmark guidelines, we conducted approximately 100 instances from the Feynman dataset
across ten independent trials. For each trial, we randomly shuffled and split a total
of 10,000 data points into training and test sets, using a 0.75/0.25 ratio, respectively.
The maximum number of candidate evaluations during the exploration is set to the
mentioned upper bound. To facilitate dimensional analysis, the benchmark cases were
extended with a dictionary providing the dimension information for each symbol within
each equation.
We also consider different levels of noise sampled from a normal distribution
utilizing the root mean square value and add it to the target [20]:

r
y˜i = yi + η | η ∼ N

0, γ

1 X 2
y
N

!
.

(3)

Here, γ takes the values {0.001, 0.01, 0.1}, evaluating how well the method performs
under different levels of uncertainty.

14

The assessment takes place by using the suggested metrics, which includes the
R2 -score (elaborated on the validation set):
R2 (Y, X, fˆ) = 1 −

Pn
2
ˆ
i=1 (yi − f (xi ))
P
.
n
2
i=1 (yi − ȳ)

(4)

This metric describes how well the model predictions explain a portion of the variance in the dependent variables of the data set, whereby a value of one indicates
a perfect fit, and zero or less suggests inadequate explanatory capabilities. Additionally, performance measurements include the run time, the average complexity of
the approximation, and the accuracy according to the recovery of the ground truth
symbolic expression. The first mentioned is determined by counting the contained
symbols within the simplified equation, whereby we employ the ‘Symbolics.jl’ library
[65] instead of ‘SymPy’ [66]. In terms of accuracy, given an approximation fˆ(x, θ̂)
expressed as functional compositions using the features xn and the explored coefficients
θ̂, symbolic accuracy (||f − fˆ||Ψ ) can be calculated as follows [20]:


ˆ
ˆ

True, f − f = 0 ∨ f − f = a, where a ∈ R is constant,
ˆ
||f − f ||Ψ = True, f /fˆ = 1 ∨ f /fˆ = a, where a ∈ R is constant,


False, otherwise.

(5)

Averaging the occurrence of ||f − fˆ||Ψ over the number of tests then expresses the
rate of how often the algorithm could find the true equation (symbolic solution rate).

4.2 Hyperparameter Setup
The trials are performed utilizing an in-house version of the GEP (implemented in
Julia [67]), with a parameter configuration derived from previous suggestions [28] and
outlined in Table 2. It is worth noting that both the solution quality and the convergence time are highly sensitive to these hyperparameter settings, which ideally are
tailored to each problem’s specific complexity. In our research, the primary objective
is to examine the effects of the consideration of physical dimensions rather than to
surpass the performance of existing algorithms. The fitness measurement of a candidate solution to drive the exploration is given by mean squared error (MSE) with an
adaptable regularization term:
n
1X
ˆ
L̂(Y, X, f ) =
(yi − fˆ(xi ))2 + λ · dϕ .
n i=1

(6)

Since the comparison also includes the widely applied approach of discarding or
penalizing the fitness value, the error function is adapted using the following
regularization:
(
∥ϕY − ϕfˆ(X) ∥2 , homogeneity violated,
dϕ (Y, X, fˆ) =
(7)
∞,
otherwise.
15

Table 2 Parameterization of the Evolutionary Method. The first column delineates the
parameter name, the second column yields the corresponding value, and the third
column provides additional context.
Parameter

Value

Comment

Population size
(GEP Test / SRBench)
Generations
(GEP Test / SRBench)
Head length

500 / 1000
1000 / 1500

Number of genes
Tournament size

3
3

Mating proportion

0.5

Mutation probability

0.2

Inversion probability

0.1

One-point crossover
probability
Two-point crossover
probability
Non-terminal set

0.5

Maximum number of
candidate solutions
Maximum number of
iterations
Maximum positions
non-terminals in a gene
Number of sub-expressions
Number of contenders in the
tournament
Fraction of the population for
for recreation
Chance of random gene
modification
Probability of sequence
reversal (classic GEP operator)
Chance of single-point
genetic exchange
Chance of two-point
genetic exchange
Available mathematical
operators
Available input features
Method for constant
optimization

Terminal set
Coefficient-Optimizer

8

0.4
{+, −, ∗, /,plog, exp, sin(),
cos(), ()2 , ()}
x1 , ..., xn
Conjugated gradient

The first line of the equation (7) evaluates an L2-norm between the resulting dimension
evaluating fˆ and the dimension of the target values Y. The choice of the λ values,
taken from the set {0, 0.1, 1, 10}, is intended to study the effect of the search direction.
A value of 0 for λ represents the baseline method. The intermediate values are likely
to influence the metric in smaller error ranges, while the higher values could dominate
even in more extensive error regimes (when L̂ ≈ 103 ). The second line is applied when
the evaluation is invalid due to a mismatch of the utilized algebraic operations and
the dimensions similar to Fig. 3.

4.3 Evaluation
Before comparing the proposed approach with existing methods in the literature, we
first examine the capabilities of our introduced technique with respect to the standard
GEP and the different quantities of the regularization.

4.3.1 Comparative Analysis of GEP
Analyzing the R2 -scores calculated from the test dataset across the conducted test trials and further separating them into their distinct categories (Fig. 4), we observe that
candidate solutions employing fitness regularization underperform compared to both

16

Noise Level: γ =0

Noise Level: γ =0.01

Noise Level: γ =0.1

1.0

R2-Score

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
L

0.1dφ
1dφ
10dφ
Regularization/Method

sbp(dφ)

L

0.1dφ
1dφ
10dφ
Regularization/Method

sbp(dφ)

L

0.1dφ
1dφ
10dφ
Regularization/Method

sbp(dφ)

Fig. 4 Boxplot, R2 -score comparison of the best-explored candidate solutions (y-axis) between the
proposed (SBP) and standard method GEP with varying fitness regularization (λ ∈ {0.1, 1, 10}) (xaxis) across increasing levels of noise γ ∈ {0, 0.01, 0.1}. The individual colors for each category signify
the separation into a degree of difficulty (green-/), ‘medium’ (orange-..), and ‘hard’ (blue-x). Here, a
score of one outlines a perfect match.

the standard method (L) and the proposed method (sbp(ϕ)). Contrary to the expectation based on the difficulty level, this strategy (λ ∈ {0.1, 1, 10}) reveals its highest
dispersion for the category labeled as ‘medium’ (orange bar), particularly for λ = 10.
Within the outlined test scenario for γ = 0, the median for the mentioned category
shifts from 0.87 to 0.74, up to 22% lower than the standard GEP. The performance
further deteriorates when γ > 0 is inferred onto the target value, also considerably
affecting the ‘easy’ samples while only slightly degrading the ‘hard’ ones, on average
from 1.0 to 0.86 and 0.88 to 0.78, respectively.
This phenomenon relates to the magnitude of the regression error in combination
with the violation that occurred. Since the ‘easy’ samples often consist of only two
to three features, the chance to achieve dimensional homogeneity is relatively high,
even without correcting them, making them less likely to be dominated by loss regularization. The ‘hard’ samples, on the other hand, face a high probability of violating
that property. Still, due to their complex nature and the difficulty of exploring them,
the regression loss exceeds the magnitude of the violation penalty, leading to a negligible influence. In contrast, most of the ‘medium’ samples also yield a considerable
degree of freedom. Yet, the likelihood is higher that the approximation shows a loss
where the magnitude is close to the regularization, indicating a high efficiency of the
search algorithm. By following this trend, we can anticipate that further incrementing
(λ → ∞), which emulates the discarding of a candidate solution akin to [13], mitigates
that success according to that score. This results in an extension of the exploration
time to achieve a similar result to the standard approach. This observation aligns with
the literature, where regularization increases training efforts.
Comparing the proposed technique, which aims to ensure dimensional homogeneity,
to the standard method, the median of the score not only is increased for the varying
difficulty (easy, medium, hard) cases but also outperforms the standard procedure
17

Noise Level: γ =0

30

Noise Level: γ =0.01

Noise Level: γ =0.1

Expression Complexity

25
20
15
10
5
L

0.1dφ
1dφ
10dφ
Regularization/Method

sbp(dφ)

L

0.1dφ
1dφ
10dφ
Regularization/Method

sbp(dφ)

L

0.1dφ
1dφ
10dφ
Regularization/Method

sbp(dφ)

Fig. 5 Comparison of the complexity of the expression for the final generation using the specified
function from the Symbolics.jl library [65] (y-axis). Here, the expression complexity is further outlined for different levels of added noise (γ ∈ {0, 0.01, 0.1}), the varying regularization (λ ∈ {0.1, 1, 10}),
and the introduced method. The individual colors for each category signify the separation into a
degree of difficulty: ‘easy’ (green-/), ‘medium’ (orange-..), and ‘hard’ (blue-x). A smaller number indicates a less complex expression.

on the three depicted noise levels. This is reflected in a decrease of the dispersion,
a shift of the median towards a higher R2 -score, and a mitigation of the negative
influence of the noise. Notably, for the most challenging samples (purple bar), our novel
approach improves the performance by 4.24%, 4.87%, and 13.45% for γ ∈ {0, 0.01, 0.1},
respectively.
Model complexity, particularly size, serves as an additional criterion for assessing
solution quality in symbolic regression. Beyond accuracy comparisons with groundtruth solutions, complementary studies like [13, 14, 48] indicate that the size of the
model relates to the robustness. Larger models are more prone to overfitting the given
dataset, are less reliable when extrapolating beyond the range of the training data,
and are more difficult to interpret. Here, Fig. 5 offers insight into the complexity of
the explored models achieving the scores mentioned before. The comparison accounts
for the variation of the chosen penalty and the increasing noise level. As expected,
independent of the adaptation, the pattern of the median complexity shows coherence
with the difficulty level, marking the lowest scores for the ‘easy’ ones and higher
values for the ‘hard’ examples. Introducing noise (γ = 0.1) induces subtle shifts in
the respective medians towards more complex functional representations when only
relying on the data as a source of information. This effect is particularly noticeable
when employing the standard method for ’easy’ equations, yielding complexity ranges
of 14.0 − 18.0. In contrast, methods utilizing loss penalties or dimensional correction
encounter only slight changes of 8% or remain stable at seven.
Regularization positively influences the complexity of the candidate solution by
comparing the achieved scores between the different techniques, which gets even
more significant when dimensional consistency dominates the search. Relating this
to the results from Fig. 4, we can emphasize that this loss in complexity negatively

18

affects the predictive capabilities. Contrary to using the backpropagation to enforce
homogeneity, it demonstrates lower complexities, here up to 45% smaller than the
standard method and up 22% compared to the regularization. Moreover, the proposed technique exhibits better robustness in the presence of noise. The enhanced
stability can be explained by the fact that noise primarily affects the data, while
the underlying physical relationship of the feature, expressed through dimensional
homogeneity, remains intact.
Statistical Significance
The metrics compared in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 can be further evaluated with a focus on
their statistical significance. Fig. 6 illustrates heatmaps displaying the statistical comparisons across various noise levels (γ ∈ {0, 0.01, 0.1}), with the first row signifying
the achieved R2 -Score and the second row showing the results on the complexity of
the approximated equations. Similar to [20], we employed the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test pairwise between the approaches (method1, method2), using the Bonferroni
correction [68] to determine the threshold α. The null hypothesis posits that method1
and method2 demonstrate equivalent performance, with rejection occurring when the
p-value falls below α. The values outlining the statistical significance for the R2 -Score
reflect the results presented in Fig. 4. The application of varying penalty terms on the
loss function for violating the homogeneity reveals marginal statistical significance
p < α for γ = 0 (0.01dϕ to 1dϕ and 10ϕ ), with diminishing effects as target noise
increases. In contrast, the proposed approach demonstrates strong significance to both
regularization (p < 1.0e−3 · α) and at least (p < 1.0e−1 · α) to the GEP across the
conducted noise levels. Examining the expression complexity at γ = 0, regularization
with the highest penalty term (10dϕ ) exhibits significantly different behavior from
the standard method, while implementations with lower penalties (1dϕ and 0.1dϕ )
yield results comparable to the standard approach. As target noise increases, the
complexity diverges more. Notably, analogous to the R2 -Score analysis, the semantic
backpropagation method demonstrates statistically significant differences from the
comparative method across all noise levels.

4.3.2 SRBench Comparision
Fig. 7 summarizes the performance of the GEP and the proposed extension (outlined as
‘SBP-GEP’) against the listed methods within the SRBench, and the results published
by Tenachi et al. [46]. Moreover, we included a method that utilizes the technique
of discarding invalid candidate solutions (‘GEP-Discard’). Here, the ranking (y-axis)
is elucidated by the symbolic solution rate (Eqn. 5) in descending order. It further
outlines the statistics according to the achieved R2 when employing the candidate
solutions on the test set and the simplified complexity. Regarding the symbolic solution
rate, it is noteworthy that the standard GEP implementation already outperforms
the other approaches. The performance significantly deteriorates when employing a
discarding approach (‘GEP-Discard’), with a solution rate decreasing by 89% and the
R2 score dropping by 87%. This degradation can be attributed to two main factors: (1)
the absence of valid individuals in the initial population and (2) the limited number of
valid candidate solutions during optimization. For case (1), the optimization stagnated

19

Fig. 6 Heatmap outlining the pair-wise comparison according to the statistical significance over the
different levels of target noise (γ ∈ {0, 0.01, 0.1}) for the R2 -Score (plots first row) and the complexity
of the expression (plots second row). Similar to [20], the Wilcoxon signed-rank test was employed
while using the Bonferroni correction for determining the threshold α. The color intensity corresponds
to the degree of statistical significance, where grey indicates no significant difference between methods
(i.e., method1 and method2 exhibit statistically equivalent performance). Darker shades represent
stronger statistical significance.

with all individuals showing inf fitness, while case (2) suffered from a low diversity
within the population that prevented a wide exploration.
When focusing specifically on the different evolutionary methods, this translates
to a rate that, on average, surpasses the AFP FE by 45%, gplearn by 81%, the GPGOMEA approximately more than two times, and the SBP-GP more than eight times.
Akin to gplearn, the chosen base approach for our extension (GEP) demonstrates a
low dispersion under inferring noise (from γ = 0 to γ = 0.1), where the solution
rate faces a drop of 8.59% (from 30.84 - 28.19), compared to AFP FE with 50% or
GP-GOMEA with 93%.
Using the information on dimensional homogeneity, we can further improve the
average performance of the GEP by 33%, from 30.3 to 44.27. Referring to the
other methods, only the PhySO approach, also incorporating the physical dimensions, demonstrates a higher solution rate (up to 38%). Apart from the fact that this
approach shows a higher solution rate when measuring the R2 -test-score, the proposed
method performs slightly better in this category. When focusing on the simplified
complexity, the equations explored by the SBP-GEP range approximately at the same
level.

20

Fig. 7 Pairplot comparing the performance of various methods listed in SRBench [20] and
recently published [46] utilizing the Feynman dataset with different levels of target noise (γ ∈
{0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1}). Metrics include symbolic solution rate, the R2 -test score, and the simplified
complexity. SBP-GEP∗ denotes the GEP method utilizing semantic backpropagation to constrain
solution with dimensional homogeneity, GEP∗ represents our basic implementation of Ferreira’s [28]
approach, and GEP-Discard∗ signifies a naive approach of discarding invalid candidates.

5 Conclusion & Future work
This study proposed a methodology for incorporating constraints through semantic
backpropagation into GEP. The example explored here is ensuring dimensional homogeneity. We adapted and included a vector representation for assigning properties to
our input features, allowing the application of algebraic operations and introducing a
distance metric. To determine the effectiveness of our method and the quality of the
resultant solutions, a series of tests on ten different trials using the Feynman data set
was conducted. We first compared the methodology against the most common strategy
(regularization) and further against the methods listed in the SRBench.
The results clearly outline the better performance compared to the regularization
method, leading to a better score and more coherent candidate solutions regarding
their functional complexity. Furthermore, results from the SRBench emphasize that
the developed method and the implemented standard can outperform other existing
approaches from the literature.
Enhancing the GEP by introducing a dimension-aware semantic backpropagation
mechanism enables the algorithm to systematically propagate information through
the expression tree, facilitating targeted modifications that guide dimensional homogeneity. Therefore, this evolutionary method now generates approximations aligning
with the physical dimensions, bridging the gap between data-driven exploration and
physics-informed modeling.
Further work would be considered to improve the algorithm further. A critical aspect of the methodology is the existence of appropriate solutions stored in a
library. Instead of random tree permutations, grammar-guided approaches [69] or language model-based approaches [70] could be applied. Furthermore, the operator can

21

be extended and reformulated to satisfy further relations or symmetries of feature
compositions.
Acknowledgements:. This research was supported by The University of Melbourne’s Research Computing Services and the Petascale Campus Initiative. The work
was supported by a Melbourne Research Scholarship provided by the University of
Melbourne.

Declarations
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Code Availability
Code and experimental setup available: GeneExpressionProgramming.jl

22

Appendix A

Entities of Gene Expression
Programming

The subsequent part introduces the key entities utilized within the GEP, which are
motivated by leveraging advantages from the Genetic Algorithm (GA) [71] and the
Genetic Programming (GP) [7]. While the first mentioned supports an efficient application of the genetic operators, the second one finds its strength in describing complex
expression trees [28]. Therefore, this approach distinguishes between the genotype
(genome) and the phenotype (expression tree).

A.1

Genotype

Akin to GA, each candidate solution within GEP is encoded as a linear string of fixed
length but employing arbitrary symbols rather than a binary symbol set. This linear
representation, the genome, can be further separated into genes, each consisting of a
head and a tail section. Sequence A1 illustrates a typical gene structure:
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

p
() ∗ + a b − c d a b c d d

(A1)

The gene structure comprises two distinct regions:
• Head [positions 0-5]: Contains both terminal and non-terminal symbols
• Tail [positions 6-12]: Contains exclusively terminal symbols
To ensure a valid tree construction during decoding, the tail length must satisfy the
relationship: tail = head + 1.

A.2

Phenotype

The decoding process constructs the expression tree by traversing the sequence A1
from left to right until all leaf nodes are populated with terminal symbols. Consequently, not all symbols in the gene sequence are necessarily incorporated into the final
expression tree. For the example given A2, the decoding terminates at position seven,
with the positions [0-7] forming the Karva expression. The unused symbols (Equation
A2 I) remain in the genome, serving as material in case genetic operators introduce
additional non-terminal symbols into the head region [0-5].
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12

p
() ∗ + a b − c d | |a b {z
c d d}

(A2)

(I)

Based on the findings in [72], the construction is performed in pre-order instead of the
initially utilized level-order method, resulting in an expression tree illustrated in Fig.
A1:

23

*
+

-

Fig. A1 Expression tree built up in pre-order presents the phenotype for the sequence in Eqn. A2.

Appendix B

Basics of Physical Dimension

The following section presents a comprehensive overview of the International System
of Units (SI).

B.1

Base Units

The system comprises seven units (or physical dimensions) constituting a foundation
for physical measurement and calculations (Table B1 [57]):
Table B1 Base Dimensions and Corresponding SI Units
Physical Quantity
Mass
Length
Time
Temperature
Amount of Substance
Electric Current
Luminous Intensity

Dimension
[M ]
[L]
[T ]
[Θ]
[N ]
[I]
[J]

Unit Name
kilogram
meter
second
kelvin
mole
ampere
candela

Symbol
kg
m
s
K
mol
A
cd

Under applying certain mathematical functions, the rules as listed in Table B2 are
utilized:
Table B2 Rules for Dimensional Analysis Operations
Operation
Addition/Subtraction
Multiplication
Division
Powers
Square Root

Rule
Same dimensions only
Dimensions multiply
Dimensions divide
Exponents apply to all factors
Halves all exponents

24

Example
[M ] + [M ] = [M ]
[M ] · [LT −2 ] = [M LT −2 ]
[M LT −2 ]/[L2 ] = [M L−1 T −2 ]
2
2 2
[M
p L] = [M L ]
[M 2 L2 ] = [M L]

B.2

Derived Units

By employing these SI units and their corresponding mathematical operations, further
units can be established [73]. Table B3 highlights frequently encountered dimension
compositions:

Table B3 Common Encountered Quantities: Units/ Dimensions
Physical Quantity

Dimension

Unit Name

Symbol

SI Base Units

Force
Energy
Power
Pressure
Velocity
Acceleration
Density
Electric Charge
Electric Potential
Resistance
Magnetic Flux

[M LT −2 ]

newton
joule
watt
pascal
meter per second
meter per second squared
kilogram per cubic meter
coulomb
volt
ohm
weber

N
J
W
Pa
m/s
m/s2
kg/m3
C
V
Ω
Wb

kg·m·s−2
kg·m2 ·s−2
kg·m2 ·s−3
kg·m−1 ·s−2
m·s−1
m·s−2
kg·m−3
A·s
kg·m2 ·s−3 ·A−1
kg·m2 ·s−3 ·A−2
kg·m2 ·s−2 ·A−1

Appendix C

[M L2 T −2 ]
[M L2 T −3 ]
[M L−1 T −2 ]
[LT −1 ]
[LT −2 ]
[M L−3 ]
[IT ]
[M L2 T −3 I −1 ]
[M L2 T −3 I −2 ]
[M L2 T −2 I −1 ]

Semantic Backpropagation

The subsequent contains supplementary material outlining technical details according
to the proposed method.

C.1

Backward Rules

Akin to the training of neural networks, the backward pass is employed in many
iterations to adjust the elements of the computational graph [63]. We must define
operators propagating information back to emulate this for the introduced method.
Table 1 indicates that for operators like ‘+’ or ‘−’, this is straightforward because
these do not transform intermediate states of ϕ. In contrast, the multiplication and
division operation has a significant impact. Therefore, their rules consist of defined
algorithmic steps that consider various cases to determine which fraction of the target
dimension should be further propagated to the corresponding underlying sub-tree.
• Backward rule multiplication depicted in algorithm 2:

25

Algorithm 2 Perform Multiplication Rule
Require: fˆi , ϕc
▷ ϕc target dimension
Ensure: ϕa , ϕb
▷ calculated residual target dimensions
1: gi ⇐ convert(fˆi )
2: ϕtl ⇐ ϕ(get node lef t(gi ))
3: ϕtr ⇐ ϕ(get node right(gi ))
4: if dϕ (ϕtl , ϕc ) < ϵ then
5:
ϕa ⇐ dϕ (ϕtl
6:
ϕb ⇐ ϕc − ϕa
▷ Employing the inverse to the forward operation
7: else if dϕ (ϕrl , ϕc ) < ϵ then
8:
ϕb ⇐ dϕ (ϕtl )
9:
ϕa ⇐ ϕc − ϕb
▷ Employing the inverse to the forward operation
10: else
▷ Split the dimension for further propagation
11:
ϕa ⇐ ϕc − ϕc ÷ 2
12:
ϕb ⇐ ϕc − ϕa
13: end if
14: return ϕa , ϕb
• Backward rule division outlined in algorithm 3:
Algorithm 3 Perform Division Rule
Require: fˆi , ϕc
▷ ϕc target dimension
Ensure: ϕa , ϕb
▷ calculated residual target dimensions
1: gi ⇐ convert(fˆi )
2: ϕtl ⇐ ϕ(get node lef t(gi ))
3: ϕtr ⇐ ϕ(get node right(gi ))
4: if dϕ (ϕtl , ϕc ) < ϵ then
5:
ϕa ⇐ dϕ (ϕtl
6:
ϕb ⇐ −(ϕc + ϕa )
▷ Employing the inverse to the forward operation
7: else if dϕ (ϕrl , ϕc ) < ϵ then
8:
ϕb ⇐ dϕ (ϕtl )
9:
ϕa ⇐ ϕc + ϕb
▷ Employing the inverse to the forward operation
10: else
▷ Split the dimension for further propagation
11:
ϕa ⇐ ϕc − ϕc ÷ 2
12:
ϕb ⇐ −(ϕc + ϕa )
13: end if
14: return ϕa , ϕb

C.2

Function Library

Applying a search operator based on semantic backpropagation as proposed in [21]
requires a library to store the desired candidate solution. This library can be initialized
in advance or filled up during runtime. Referring to a problem from the domain of
26

Fig. C2 Pairplot comparing the performance of various methods listed in SRBench [20] and
recently published [46] utilizing the Feynman dataset on different levels of target noise (γ ∈
{0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1}). Metrics include the symbolic solution rate, the R2 -test-score, and the execution
time. The latter metric was multiplied by the threads employed. SBP-GEP∗ denotes the GEP method
utilizing semantic backpropagation to ensure dimensional homogeneity, SBP Lib∗ the dimensionbased library, while GEP∗ represents our basic implementation of Ferreira’s [28] approach.

symbolic regression, where we can describe such stored representations as trees, the
question of the number of stored subsolutions, the corresponding memory overhead,
the consistency, and the acceptable amount of time for fetching these intermediate
states arises:
1. Memory overhead: The overhead of the memory once depends on the total number of trees and the internal tree representation. In our GEP implementation, we
have chosen a more data-oriented design. Instead of focusing on code readability
or object abstraction, the gene information is stored as an integer representation
in an array (max alignment eight bytes per entry), whereby the size is restricted
by the head length (hl) (hyperparameter 2). Constructing the library is an iterative process, inserting new non-terminals and complementing them with terminals
or the sub-trees created. Leveraging this process, an upper limit can be estimated
by conducting the theoretical analysis of search space scaling outlined by Jiang et
al. [31]. Given the terminals as m and the non-terminals as o, the size of the search
space with l internal nodes scales with:



l−1
O (4(m + 1)o) 2 .

(C3)

Based on that, the upper limit can be estimated:
|Lib(o, m, hl)| =

hl 
X

min(105 , (4(m + 1)o)

i

27

hl−1
2

)



(C4)

where 105 limits the amount of newly generated candidates according to practical
reasons. Assuming m = 7 as the average inputs, hl = 8 and o = 9 lead to approximately 3.9 ∗ 105 . Moreover, the array of length hl and the mentioned alignment
(8 Byte per position using Int64) yields a library of around 25Mb memory. Which
can be further optimized by considering UInt32 or UInt8.
2. Overhead Computational Time: Applying a correction mechanism to a large
proportion of the population raises further questions about the effect of the runtime, including the time for the library creation and execution. The overhead
was quantified by monitoring the execution throughout the experimental process.
Fig. (C.2) (right-panel) provides an indication of the required time, including the
different noise levels multiplied by the threads utilized. The results demonstrate
while the proposed method offers superior performance compared to the standard
approach, it extends the execution by approximately two to 2.5 times.
3. Consistency: Library construction adheres to predefined rules to avoid homogeneity violations (ref. Eqn. 7), preventing arithmetic issues or the occurrence of
redundant nested functions like (exp(log(cos(...)))). Since these entries are utilized
to accomplish a beneficial exploration, we expect them to be appropriate for the
given task. To test this hypothesis, we conduct the same test setup as in 4 and
compare the R2 (Eqn. 4) as well the solution rate (Eqn. 5). In detail, we employ
all entries that match the target physical dimension in combination with coefficient
optimization. The result presented in Fig. C2 reveals that the entries outer show
similar performance to the gplearn. Relating this to the amount of complexity that
can show up and the number of equations within the ‘easy’ set implies that the
content can at least discover approximately 50% from the mentioned subset. On
the contrary, the R2 is dominated by the low accuracy of the candidate solutions
for ‘medium’ and ‘hard’ cases.

28

References
[1] Brunton, S.L., Proctor, J.L., Kutz, N.J.: Discovering governing equations from
data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 113(15), 3932–
3937 (2016)
[2] Li, J., Du, X., Martins, J.R.R.A.: Machine learning in aerodynamic shape
optimization. Progress in Aerospace Sciences 134, 100849 (2022)
[3] Vamathevan, J., Clark, D., Czodrowski, P., Dunham, I., Ferran, E., Lee, G., Li,
B., Madabhushi, A., Shah, P., Spitzer, M., Zhao, S.: Applications of machine
learning in drug discovery and development. Nature Reviews Drug Discovery
18(6), 463–477 (2019)
[4] Makke, N., Chawla, S.: Interpretable scientific discovery with symbolic regression:
A review. Artificial Intelligence Review 57(1), 2 (2024)
[5] Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., Karniadakis, G.E.: Physics-informed neural networks:
A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving
nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics 378,
686–707 (2019)
[6] Greydanus, S., Dzamba, M., Yosinski, J.: Hamiltonian neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA (2019)
[7] Koza, J.R.: Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means
of Natural Selection. A Bradford book. Bradford, Cambridge, Massachusetts
(1992)
[8] Zhang, H., Zhou, A.: Rl-gep: Symbolic regression via gene expression programming and reinforcement learning. In: 2021 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp. 1–8 (2021)
[9] Janikow, C.Z.: A methodology for processing problem constraints in genetic
programming. Computers and Mathematics with Applications 32(8), 97–113
(1996)
[10] Montana, D.J.: Strongly typed genetic programming. Evolutionary Computation
3(2), 199–230 (1995)
[11] Sobania, D.: On the generalizability of programs synthesized by grammar-guided
genetic programming. In: Genetic Programming: 24th European Conference,
EuroGP 2021, Held as Part of EvoStar 2021, Virtual Event, April 7–9, 2021,
Proceedings 24, pp. 130–145 (2021). Springer

29

[12] Ramos Criado, P., Barrios Rolanı́a, D., Manrique, D., Serrano, E.: Grammatically
uniform population initialization for grammar-guided genetic programming. Soft
Computing 24(15), 11265–11282 (2020)
[13] Bleh, A., Geiser, G.: Finding transition models using dimensional analysis gene
expression programming. In: AIAA SciTech 2024 Forum, p. 1573 (2024)
[14] Grundner, A., Beucler, T., Gentine, P., Eyring, V.: Data-Driven Equation
Discovery of a Cloud Cover Parameterization. e2023MS003763 2023MS003763
(2024)
[15] Ni, J., Rockett, P.: Tikhonov regularization as a complexity measure in multiobjective genetic programming. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation
19, 157–166 (2015)
[16] Montana, D.J.: Strongly Typed Genetic Programming. Evolutionary Computation 3(2), 199–230 (1995)
[17] O’Neill, M., Ryan, C.: Grammatical evolution. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 5(4), 349–358 (2001)
[18] McKay, B., Hoài, N., Whigham, P., Shan, Y., O’Neill, M.: Grammar-based genetic
programming: a survey. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines 11, 365–
396 (2010)
[19] Ratle, A., Sebag, M.: Genetic programming and domain knowledge: Beyond the
limitations of grammar-guided machine discovery, pp. 211–220 (2007)
[20] La Cava, W., Burlacu, B., Virgolin, M., Kommenda, M., Orzechowski, P., França,
F.O., Jin, Y., Moore, J.H.: Contemporary symbolic regression methods and
their relative performance. Advances in neural information processing systems
2021(DB1), 1 (2021)
[21] Pawlak, T.P., Wieloch, B., Krawiec, K.: Semantic backpropagation for designing
search operators in genetic programming. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation 19(3), 326–340 (2015)
[22] Virgolin, M., Pissis, S.P.: Symbolic regression is np-hard. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research
[23] McKay, B., Willis, M.J., W. Barton, G.: Using a tree-structured genetic algorithm
to perform symbolic regression, 487–492 (1995)
[24] Augusto, D.A., Barbosa, H.J.C.: Symbolic regression via genetic programming.
In: Proceedings. Vol.1. Sixth Brazilian Symposium on Neural Networks, pp. 173–
178 (2000)
[25] Cranmer, M.: Interpretable Machine Learning for Science with PySR and
30

SymbolicRegression.jl (2023)
[26] Stephens, T.: gplearn: Genetic Programming in Python, with a scikitlearn inspired API. Online; accessed [06.2021] (2015). https://github.com/
trevorstephens/gplearn
[27] He, B., Lu, Q., Yang, Q., Luo, J., Wang, Z.: Taylor genetic programming for symbolic regression. In: Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference. GECCO ’22, pp. 946–954. ACM, New York, NY, USA (2022)
[28] Ferreira, C.: Gene Expression Programming: Mathematical Modeling by an
Artificial Intelligence. Studies in Computational Intelligence. Springer, Berlin
(2006)
[29] Virgolin, M., Alderliesten, T., Witteveen, C., Bosman, P.A.N.: Improving
model-based genetic programming for symbolic regression of small expressions.
Evolutionary Computation 29(2), 211–237 (2021)
[30] Kasten, C., Fahr, J., Klein, M.: An Efficient Way of Introducing Gender Into Evolutionary Algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 27(4),
1005–1014 (2023)
[31] Jiang, N., Xue, Y.: Symbolic regression via control variable genetic programming.
In: Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases: Research Track,
pp. 178–195. Springer, Cham (2023)
[32] Baeta, F., Correia, J., Martins, T., Machado, P.: TensorGP – Genetic Programming Engine in TensorFlow. Springer, Cham (2021)
[33] Kamienny, P.A., D’Ascoli, S., Lample, G., Charton, F.: End-to-end Symbolic Regression with Transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 35, 1–20 (2022)
[34] Sahoo, S., Lampert, C., Martius, G.: Learning equations for extrapolation and
control. In: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 80, pp. 4442–4450. PMLR,
Stockholm, Sweden (2018)
[35] Petersen, B.K., Landajuela, M.L., Mundhenk, T.N., Santiago, C.P., Kim, S.K.,
Kim, J.T.: Deep Symbolic Regression: Recovering Mathematical Expressions
From Data Via Risk-Seeking Policy Gradients. ICLR 2021 - 9th International
Conference on Learning Representations (2021)
[36] Mundhenk, N.T., Santiago, C.P., Landajuela, M., Faissol, D.M., Glatt, R.,
Petersen, B.K.: Symbolic Regression via Neural-Guided Genetic Programming Population Seeding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
30(NeurIPS), 24912–24923 (2021)

31

[37] Valipour, M., You, B., Panju, M., Ghodsi, A.: SymbolicGPT: A Generative
Transformer Model for Symbolic Regression (2021) arXiv:2106.14131
[38] Biggio, L., Bendinelli, T., Lucchi, A., Parascandolo, G.: A Seq2Seq approach to
Symbolic Regression (NeurIPS), 1–7 (2020)
[39] Biggio, L., Bendinelli, T., Neitz, A., Lucchi, A., Parascandolo, G.: Neural Symbolic Regression that Scales. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 139,
936–945 (2021)
[40] Vastl, M., Kulhánek, J., Kubalı́k, J., Derner, E., Babuška, R.: Symformer: Endto-end symbolic regression using transformer-based architecture. IEEE Access 12,
37840–37849 (2024)
[41] Kamienny, P.-A., Lample, G., Lamprier, S., Virgolin, M.: Deep generative symbolic regression with Monte-Carlo-Tree-Search. In: Krause, A., Brunskill, E.,
Cho, K., Engelhardt, B., Sabato, S., Scarlett, J. (eds.) Proceedings of the 40th
International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 202, pp. 15655–15668. PMLR, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA (2023)
[42] Udrescu, S.-M., Tegmark, M.: Ai feynman: A physics-inspired method for
symbolic regression. Science Advances 6(16), 2631 (2020)
[43] Udrescu, S.M., Tan, A., Feng, J., Neto, O., Wu, T., Tegmark, M.: AI Feynman
2.0: Pareto-optimal symbolic regression exploiting graph modularity. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 2020-Decem(NeurIPS), 1–12 (2020)
[44] Bakarji, J., Callaham, J., Brunton, S.L., Kutz, J.N.: Dimensionally consistent
learning with Buckingham Pi. Nature Computational Science 2(12), 834–844
(2022)
[45] Buckingham, E.: On physically similar systems; illustrations of the use of
dimensional equations. Physical review 4(4), 345 (1914)
[46] Tenachi, W., Ibata, R., Diakogiannis, F.I.: Deep symbolic regression for physics
guided by units constraints: toward the automated discovery of physical laws.
The Astrophysical Journal 959(2), 99 (2023)
[47] Matchev, K.T., Matcheva, K., Roman, A.: Analytical modeling of exoplanet
transit spectroscopy with dimensional analysis and symbolic regression. The
Astrophysical Journal 930(1), 33 (2022)
[48] Ma, W., Zhang, J., Feng, K., Xing, H., Wen, D.: Dimensional homogeneity
constrained gene expression programming for discovering governing equations.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 985, 12 (2024)
[49] Faradonbeh, R.S., Salimi, A., Monjezi, M., Ebrahimabadi, A., Moormann, C.:

32

Roadheader performance prediction using genetic programming (gp) and gene
expression programming (gep) techniques. Environmental Earth Sciences 76(16),
584 (2017)
[50] Faradonbeh, R.S., Armaghani, D.J., Monjezi, M., Mohamad, E.T.: Genetic programming and gene expression programming for flyrock assessment due to mine
blasting. International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences 88,
254–264 (2016)
[51] Zhong, J., Feng, L., Ong, Y.S.: Gene expression programming: A survey. IEEE
Computational Intelligence Magazine 12(3), 54–72 (2017)
[52] Feynman, R.P.R.P.: The Feynman Lectures on Physics vol. 3, p. 29. AddisonWesley Pub. Co., Reading, Mass. (1963-1965). Vol. 2 has subtitle: The Electromagnetic Field; Vol. 3 has subtitle: Quantum Mechanics. Includes bibliographical
references and indexes.
[53] Reiser, P., Neubert, M., Eberhard, A., Torresi, L., Zhou, C., Shao, C., Metni, H.,
Hoesel, C., Schopmans, H., Sommer, T., Friederich, P.: Graph neural networks
for materials science and chemistry. Communications Materials 3(1), 93 (2022)
[54] Jha, K., Saha, S., Singh, H.: Prediction of protein–protein interaction using graph
neural networks. Scientific Reports 12(1), 8360 (2022)
[55] Cappart, Q., Chételat, D., Khalil, E.B., Lodi, A., Morris, C.J., Veličković, P.:
Combinatorial optimization and reasoning with graph neural networks. Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
4348–4355 (2021)
[56] Wang, J.: A survey on graph neural networks. EAI Endorsed Transactions on
E-Learning 8 (2023)
[57] Wiersma, D.S., Mana, G.: The fundamental constants of physics and the
International System of Units. vol. 32, pp. 655–663. Springer (2021)
[58] Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T.E., Haberland, M., Reddy, T., Cournapeau, D., Burovski, E., Peterson, P., Weckesser, W., Bright, J., van der Walt,
S.J., Brett, M., Wilson, J., Millman, K.J., Mayorov, N., Nelson, A.R.J., Jones, E.,
Kern, R., Larson, E., Carey, C.J., Polat, İ., Feng, Y., Moore, E.W., VanderPlas,
J., Laxalde, D., Perktold, J., Cimrman, R., Henriksen, I., Quintero, E.A., Harris, C.R., Archibald, A.M., Ribeiro, A.H., Pedregosa, F., van Mulbregt, P., SciPy
1.0 Contributors: SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in
Python. Nature Methods 17, 261–272 (2020)
[59] The OpenFOAM Foundation: OpenFOAM: The Open Source CFD Toolbox.
Online (2024). https://openfoam.org/

33

[60] O’Neill, M., Ryan, C.: Grammatical evolution. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 5(4), 349–358 (2001)
[61] Sun, S., Ouyang, R., Zhang, B., Zhang, T.Y.: Data-driven discovery of formulas
by symbolic regression. MRS Bulletin 44(7), 559–564 (2019)
[62] Szubert, M., Kodali, A., Ganguly, S., Das, K., Bongard, J.: Semantic forward
propagation for symbolic regression, vol. 9921, pp. 364–374 (2016)
[63] Wang, L., Zhao, J.: Algorithmic differentiation. In: Architecture of Advanced
Numerical Analysis Systems: Designing a Scientific Computing System using
OCaml, pp. 49–75. Apress, Berkeley, CA (2023)
[64] Pawlak, P.T., Wieloch, B., Krawiec, K.: Semantic backpropagation for designing search operators in genetic programming. Trans. Evol. Comp 19(3), 326–340
(2015)
[65] Gowda, S., Ma, Y., Cheli, A., Gwozdz, M., Shah, V.B., Edelman, A., Rackauckas,
C.: High-performance symbolic-numerics via multiple dispatch. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.03949 (2021)
[66] Meurer, A., Smith, C.P., Paprocki, M., Čertı́k, O., Kirpichev, S.B., Rocklin, M.,
Kumar, A., Ivanov, Moore, J.K., Singh, S., Rathnayake, T., Vig, S., Granger,
B.E., Muller, R.P., Bonazzi, F., Gupta, H., Vats, S., Johansson, F., Pedregosa, F.,
Curry, M.J., Terrel, A.R., Roučka, Saboo, A., Fernando, I., Kulal, S., Cimrman,
R., Scopatz, A.: Sympy: symbolic computing in python. PeerJ Computer Science
3, 103 (2017)
[67] Bezanson, J., Karpinski, S., Shah, V.B., Edelman, A.: Julia: A fast dynamic
language for technical computing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1209.5145 (2012)
[68] Demšar, J.: Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. J. Mach.
Learn. Res. 7, 1–30 (2006)
[69] Crochepierre, L., Boudjeloud-Assala, L., Barbesant, V.: A Reinforcement Learning Approach to Domain-Knowledge Inclusion Using Grammar Guided Symbolic
Regression (2022)
[70] Reissmann, M., Fang, Y., Ooi, S.H., Sandberg, R.D.: Accelerating evolutionary exploration through language model-based transfer learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.05166 (2024)
[71] Holland, J.H.: Genetic Algorithms. Scientific American 267(1), 66–73 (1992)
[72] Li, X., Zhou, C., Xiao, W., Nelson, P.C.: Prefix gene expression programming.
(2005)
[73] Taylor, B.N.: Guide for the use of the International System of Units (SI).
34

NIST Special Publication 811, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD (1995)

35

